Memo to: Oaktree Clients 
From:    Howard  Marks  
Re:            Plan      B      
Over the last decade or two, Plan A consisted of relying on the free market to maximize 
economic growth and efficiency (as described in “The Aviary,” May 2008).  What can 
we say about that?  Oops?  We don’t hear much at this moment about market efficiency, 
or about the proposition that it would cause complex mortgage-backed securities to be 
priced right. 
So now we have Plan B, better known as TARP, the Troubled Asset Relief Program.  On 
the heels of other injections of capital by the U.S. Treasury and Fed and central banks 
elsewhere, it was proposed on Friday that up to $700 billion be spent to purchase “toxic” 
mortgage securities f
rom financial institutions that are weighed down with them. 
UYa’ Gotta Believe 
Those who have more money than they need lend it to those with use for more money 
than they have.  This process is called providing credit.  The movement of credit puts 
otherwise-idle money to work and thus adds to economic output.  Economies run on 
credit.   
According to Merriam-Webster, the word “credit” is derived from the Latin 
credere: “to believe, entrust.”  We provide credit when we believe in borrowers and 
trust that they’ll pay us back (although we believe in some more than others and charge 
the latter more interest).  Further, the entire economy runs on trust: that the people to 
whom we provide goods and services will pay their bills; that contracts will be adhered 
to; and that money will retain value, or at least the part that inflation doesn’t erode. 
Belief is what makes the econom
ic world go round.  Take a minute to think about how 
we would behave in a world in which there wasn’t trust in money, the institutions that 
store it and the mechanisms that move it from one place to another.  Clearly, we’d be 
sunk without trust in the financial system. 
I’ve described in the past how financial institutions are vulnerable to loss of faith 
because of their unique combination of opacity, leverage, conscious risk bearing, 
and their use of short-term deposits and borrowings to fund longer-term, illiquid 
assets.  When providers of capital lose faith in a financial institution, they line up to 
withdraw their money.  But the institution can’t give them all back their money, because 
it can’t liquify all of its assets immediately.  Attempts to do so increase the downward 
2008 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.All Rights Reserved

pressure on asset prices, further weakening financial positions and reinforcing the loss of 
faith.  And thus the circle becomes vicious and we have a “run on the bank.”  
 
We saw m
any runs on banks during the Great Depression; the result was the introduction 
of federal deposit insurance.  We also saw a bank run in the U.K. last year, when 
depositors lined up at the Northern Rock building society until the Bank of England 
calmed fears by guaranteeing all deposits.  (I had money there, and believe me, absent the 
guarantee, the 2% penalty for early withdrawals would have been powerless to dissuade 
me from moving the remaining 98% to a safer institution.  Take a few hundred or 
thousand of me, and you have a run on the bank.) 
 
In short, the government is attempting to prevent a loss of belief.  Is such a thing 
possible?  Ask yourself whether eight months ago you thought possible this year’s 
developments at Bear Stearns, IndyMac, Lehman Brothers, AIG, Fannie Mae and Freddie 
Mac.  To some extent, they all stemmed from a loss of faith. 
 
 
UThe Source of the Problem 
 
There are two principal fundamental causes behind the events we’re seeing.  The 
first is the huge losses in complex mortgage-backed securities.  As I’ve written before, 
the issuance and purchase of these securities resulted from the following confluence of 
factors: 
 
 Quest for return, decline in risk aversion and lowering of skepticism. 
 A boom in home prices and a belief that they couldn’t fall back en masse. 
 Securitization and selling onward of debt – which eliminated lenders’ hesitance to 
lend and led to a process in which everyone profited when a loan was made. 
 Thus an increased willingness to lend higher percentages of the skyrocketing prices of 
homes, even where the borrower couldn’t demonstrate creditworthiness. 
 Widespread use of leverage (because the risks were underrated) and complexity in 
fashioning mortgage-backed securities. 
 Massive shortcomings at rating agencies that erroneously described the resulting 
securities as investment grade, and sometimes even “super senior.” 
 
In this way, enormous amounts of overrated securities came to the market.  They went to 
financial institutions that didn’t understand the riskiness of what they were buying and 
thus permitted themselves to become vastly overleveraged. 
 
I’ll keep it simple.  Suppose you have $1 million in equity capital.  You borrow $29 
million and buy $30 million of mortgage loans.  Twenty percent (or $6 million) of the 
mortgages go into default, and the recovery on them turns out to be only two-thirds ($4 
million).  Thus you’ve lost $2 million . . . your equity capital twice over.  Now you have 
equity capital of minus $1 million, with assets of $28 million and debt of $29 million.  
Everyone realizes that there’ll be nothing left for the people who’re last in line to 
withdraw their money, so there’s a run on the bank.  And you slide into bankruptcy. 
2008 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.2All Rights Reserved

 
Because of the high regard in which financial institutions were held; because of the 
implied government backing of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac; and because permissible 
leverage increased over time, financial institutions’ equity capital was permitted to 
become highly inadequate given the riskiness of the assets they held.  Or perhaps I should 
say institutions took on too many risky assets given the limitations of their equity capital.  
That, in a nutshell, is why institutions have disappeared. 
 
The second fundamental factor leading up to the current mess was the creation of 
the vast market in derivatives, especially credit default swaps (CDS).  In the current 
decade, CDS came into broad use as a mechanism for insuring against defaults.  For an 
up-front fee and an annual premium, holders of debt could get someone else to promise 
that they’d buy that debt at face value in the case of a default or other “credit event.”   
 
The buyers of CDS accepted at face value that the writers of the insurance would pay if 
there was a default.  For this reason, because Bank A had bought insurance on Company 
X’s debt from Hedge Fund B, it considered it safe to sell insurance to Bank C.  But what 
if X defaults and A has to pay C but can’t collect from B?  There’s over $60 trillion of 
CDS outstanding, and a lot of it is well hedged in theory; thus the net exposure to defaults 
if everyone pays might be rather small.  But if some counterparties are unable to pay, 
institutions that bought insurance from them (or from others that bought from those 
institutions) might fail to receive billions in payments.  Consider it one big daisy chain.  
It’s probably because of its position as a counterparty that Bear Stearns wasn’t permitted 
to fail in March (while Lehman was cut adrift this month when its failure was judged to 
be bearable). 
 
Of course, these two developments have been complicated by (a) the fact that no one can 
reasonably say what the home underlying a mortgage is worth (the intrinsic value of a 
non-cash-producing asset is a useless concept in the short run), (b) the fact that no one 
knows how the credit swap market will function in a crisis, and (c) their own sheer 
magnitude.  The sum of the foregoing has the potential to place in jeopardy any financial 
institution that lacks federal backing.  It’s for this reason that the government has 
assumed the liabilities of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, lent money to AIG, accepted 
Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley as bank holding companies (with permanent access 
to Fed borrowings), backstopped money market funds, and now proposes to purchase 
$700 billion of mortgage securities. 
 
 
UDoes Ben Know Something We Don’t? 
 
I cited the above headline in “Now What?” last January.  That’s what breakingviews.com 
asked about the Fed’s September 2007 decision to cut rates by 50 basis points rather than 
the expected 25.  Clearly Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke thought the circumstances called 
for stronger medicine than most observers. 
 
2008 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.3All Rights Reserved

Now it’s clear that both Bernanke and Treasury Secretary Hank Paulson envision 
possible consequences justifying the strongest possible action.  Last weekend, for 
example, Paulson said in an interview, “I don’t like the fact that we have to do this.  I 
hate the fact that we have to do it.  But it’s better than the alternative.”  (Em
phasis 
added) 
 
What is the alternative?  As I suggested last week in “Nobody Knows,” there really is no 
outcome so negative that it can’t be imagined.  That doesn’t mean terrible things will 
happen if no action is taken, but the possibilities are there, causing fear.  Obviously, 
Bernanke and Paulson feel some of them could come to pass, and I respect their opinion. 
 
So what is that alternative Paulson alludes to?  Cascading bank failures?  Interlocking 
dependence on counterparties in the derivatives markets who lack the ability to make 
good on their liabilities?  Ultimately, reduced faith in U.S. Treasury securities and the 
dollar?  As I said last week, I don’t know.  But it’s not unreasonable to respect these 
possibilities.  Our leaders want to justify the strongest action in history without spooking 
the market by enumerating the possibilities, so they’re not being too specific.  The Great 
Depression is our only model.  I believe it justifies strong action. 
 
Let me take a moment to say we’re enormously lucky to have the right team in place at 
this time.  Bernanke is a highly respected academic expert on the Great Depression, and 
Paulson is the very successful practitioner who chaired Goldman Sachs, an institution for 
which I have enormous respect.  Being human, they’re unlikely to get it all right.  But I 
can’t think of anyone I’d rather have in their jobs.   
 
 
UThe Plan and the Stumbling Blocks 
 
The plan is simple.  In fact, to some it’s too un-bureaucratic to be acceptable.  The 
Treasury will use up to $700 billion to purchase the most toxic mortgage-backed 
securities from financial institutions – both U.S. and foreign – that do business in the U.S.  
This will reduce the doubt about the institutions’ solvency and, in place of unsalable 
assets, give them cash they can lend.  No external oversight or internal process is 
specified, and the result will be immune from examination by other authorities and from 
litigation.   
 
Having described the plan in one paragraph, it’ll take much more space to discuss the 
complaints being voiced and the obstacles in its path. 
 
 We’re asked to trust the judgment and integrity of the Treasury Department.  I find 
this a pragmatic and direct solution.  Others more skeptical than me disagree.  Some 
think Paulson will be biased in favor of Goldman Sachs and the rest of Wall Street, 
but I’m convinced he took the job out of noblesse oblige – not for money or fun, I 
think – and I trust him to do his level best. 
 
2008 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.4All Rights Reserved

On that subject, let me share a little history.  Fifteen years ago, the staff of the 
Resolution Trust Company asked if we could help them achieve fair prices in 
disposing of the assets they’d taken on from failed S&Ls.  I outlined a plan under 
which brokers would be asked for bids and we would watch the brokers, judging the 
adequacy of those bids.  “But who’ll watch you,” they asked.  My reply: “I’ve got 
bad news: you’re going to have to trust someone.”  I’m perfectly happy trusting the 
Paulson-led Treasury. 
 
 In a similar vein, some are complaining about the lack of supervision in the plan.  The 
Financial Times quoted Barack Obama as saying, “We cannot give a blank check to 
Washington with no oversight or accountability . . .”  Well, for my part, I’d rather 
entrust power to one wise man than a committee or bureaucracy consisting of average 
people.  I think Paulson is that one wise man, but I’m also sure he’s smart enough to 
surround himself with others who are equally capable. 
 
 What will the marching orders be?  In particular, what sort of prices will be paid?  
Fair market prices or higher?  First of all, it’s almost impossible to come up with a 
fair or “market” price for many of these assets today.  Second, paying just the market 
price in the current highly depressed market wouldn’t do much for the institutions’ 
net capital position.  But third, if more than the market price is paid, that’ll be seen as 
a “giveaway to Wall Street.”  It has to be made explicit – to those expected to 
approve the plan, and certainly to those expected to carry it out – whether these 
will be straight sales at market or they’ll include a subsidy.  I think a bunch of the 
latter is called for.    
 
 Even beyond the points listed above, another issue may present a bigger 
stumbling block.  The greatest reluctance may relate to the fact that, under the 
plan, when the process restores the viability of institutions that now are 
burdened with negative book value and inadequate confidence, the immediate 
financial benefits would go to shareholders and executives who either 
participated in the creation of the problem or, at any rate, should be penalized 
for the companies’ failings.   
 
To solve the problem, some say that in exchange for taking securities off institutions’ 
hands – especially at above-market prices – the government should get ownership 
positions in those institutions.  But how much?  What would be the proper quid pro 
quo?  If a $1 billion purchase of debt at $200 million above market saved a $15 
billion institution, what piece of the company should the government receive?  Do we 
want the government owning large pieces of private companies, or running them?  
And would that ownership stake then put the government in a conflict position vis-à-
vis the institutions where it’s not an owner?  This is obviously a complex issue, and 
I’d hate to see it delay the solution of the problems we face. 
 
Further, there are calls for requiring executives at the institutions involved to accept 
limits on their compensation.  What could be worse than setting up reasons for people 
to hesitate before reaching for this lifeline? 
2008 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.5All Rights Reserved

 
 Certainly politics will be a major factor in whether the plan is enacted and in what 
form.  In that regard, there couldn’t be a worse time for this to be debated than six 
weeks before the election. 
 
After being well ahead in the polls until late August, Barack Obama lost his lead 
when the Republicans held their convention and made Sarah Palin their vice 
presidential candidate.  But last week, when the economic crisis exploded and John 
McCain described the economy as strong, the Democrats pulled back into the lead.  
That’s not lost on them, and I’m sure they’ll continue to use the issue to maximum 
advantage.  They’ll complain about the one-sidedness of the Wall Street bailout and 
demand something for “the rest of us,” like further economic stimulus, direct relief 
for mortgage borrowers, and loans to the auto makers.  This politicizing might delay 
the process, encumber it with baggage, or make it unattractive to its supporters. 
 
Democrats will attack the plan to make Republicans look bad, and conservative 
Republicans may resist it as an unwarranted extension of the government’s reach.  In 
the end I feel it’ll pass, but who knows in what form. 
 
I don’t view the plan as mainly a bailout for Wall Street and fat cats.  Saving the 
financial system will benefit all users of capital, including home buyers and auto 
makers.  Of course, that may sound like “trickle-down economics,” which some are 
happy to rail against.   
 
I think federal ownership would be a very hairy matter.  But in this case I do have a 
solution, at least regarding the prices at which the government resells the debt: Why not 
simply say that the government should receive half of the buyers’ return in excess of 
a 20% yearly rate, or some such?  Ownership would present challenges, but sharing in 
the benefit would not. 
 
 
UWho’s In the Wrong? 
 
There’ll be cries for scalps, and politicians will play to the crowd by assigning blame.  
This should be primarily a side-show, but it can grow into a significant distraction. 
 
Short sellers are in the crosshairs most prominently.  It is a simple fact that ever since the 
up-tick rule was revoked fourteen months ago, short sellers have had the ability to drive 
down stock prices, which they couldn’t do if a short sale could only take place at a price 
higher than the last trade.  It’s also a fact that some financial stocks have fallen, and that 
their declines have added to worries about the companies, inducing further declines.  Of 
course, no connection between the two has yet been proved. 
 
As a result of the recent market action, short selling was outlawed in roughly 800 
financial stocks, including outliers such as General Electric.  This action was coincident 
with last Friday’s rally, and people breathed a sigh of relief.  Had short sellers been 
2008 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.6All Rights Reserved

responsible for the demise of Lehman?  Should short selling be banned?  As usual, the 
answer isn’t clear. 
 
Balancing out the simple truths stated above, a number of factors argue in favor of short 
selling or against a ban: 
 
 Short selling isn’t “worse” than outright buying.  One makes stocks go down; the 
other makes them go up.  Why is shorting – selling what you don’t own – any worse 
than buying what you don’t own? 
 Short selling is a highly legitimate way for investors to act on their belief that a 
stock’s price is too high.  Thus it tends to help stocks sell at fair prices. 
 Short selling can bring losses to those who hold stock, but unabated buying can force 
stock prices to too-high levels where no one should buy.  What can we do to prevent 
injury from purchases during unjustified booms? 
 Sure you can keep stock prices from being forced down by outlawing short 
selling.  But then why not outlaw all selling?  Think of what that would do for 
stock prices! 
 
In the short run, protecting the financial system is more important than preserving market 
efficiency or heeding the above arguments.  Thus I do not think it was a mistake to ban 
short selling for the time being. 
 
In the long run, however, I feel a ban on short selling is not in order, although I consider 
it desirable for the up-tick rule to be brought back. 
 
Finally, as with many other things, the real problem isn’t with short selling, but with 
abusive short selling.  Manipulating the market to make short positions profitable by 
spreading negative rumors or bidding up CDS (see “Nobody Knows” from last week) 
should be driven out . . . although doing so won’t be easy. 
 
 
*            *            * 
 
 
The trouble with memo writing at times like these is that there’s always more.  But this is 
a good time to wrap up regarding the Treasury’s plan.  My conclusions are as follows: 
 
In the period 2003-07, the government, and especially the Fed, stimulated the 
economy and the financial system when they should have been acting restrictively to 
curb excesses.  On the contrary, stimulation is in order today to prevent serious 
damage.  I think we’re going to get it. 
 
But I also expect to see a rising tide of regulation of financial institutions in the period 
ahead, and I don’t think restrictiveness will be the right thing until the system is on a firm 
footing.  It’s widely agreed that the authorities contributed to the severity of the 
2008 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.7All Rights Reserved

Depression by withdrawing liquidity when they should have been increasing it.  Let’s not 
tighten again. 
 
In “Doesn’t Make Sense” in July, I listed four things that have to happen in order for the 
trends in mortgages and financial ins
titutions to turn positive: 
 
 Home prices have to stop going down. 
 Home mortgages have to be made available. 
 Financial institutions have to stop experiencing incremental write-offs. 
 Financial institutions have to be able to raise additional capital with which to rebuild 
their balance sheets. 
 
I also pointed to the complication: that each of these four things is dependent on the 
occurrence of another.  The good news is that the Treasury plan has the potential to 
break into the cycle of negativity, directly address the third and fourth of these, and 
thus contribute to the first and second.  That’s why I’m all for it. 
 
In the Depression, the engine of capital provision went into a long-term stall, and we 
know the consequences.  The attempt now is to jump-start processes that have 
stalled and prevent the rest from doing so.  I’m sure this is the right thing to do, and 
I hope for its success. 
 
 
September 24, 2008 
 
 
 
P.s.,  In “You Can’t Predict.  You Can Prepare.” (November 2001), I described the 
process through which stock markets pull out of declines and turn upward: 
 
Stocks are cheapest when everything looks grim.  The depressing outlook keeps 
them there, and only a few astute and daring bargain hunters are willing to take 
new positions.  Maybe their buying attracts some attention, or maybe the 
outlook turns a little less depressing, but for one reason or another, the market 
starts moving up. 
 
In the latest development, it was announced yesterday that Berkshire Hathaway would 
invest $5 billion in Goldman Sachs stock.  Warren Buffett exemplifies the kind of person 
who can step out of the crowd.  Perhaps his example can make a few more people stop 
worrying about losing money and start worrying about missing out on gains.  One of 
these days, that’ll happen, and things will turn for the better. 
 
 
 
 
 
2008 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.8All Rights Reserved