Memo to: Oaktree Clients 
From: Howard Marks  
Re: It Is Wh
at It Is  
My first exposure to the phrase that serves as the title for this memo came in 1995, a few days 
before Oaktree opened its doors.  My partners and I wracked our brains over whether we’d 
covered every base.  We asked our attorney, Peter Ostroff of Sidley & Austin, if he thought we’d 
missed anything.  Peter’s answer was succinct and on target as usual: “It is what it is.” 
In the March 5 edition of The New York Tim
es, William Safire devoted the Sunday Magazine’s 
“On Language” column to “it is what it is.”  He mentioned that the first use he could find had 
been in 1949, and that the phrase had been adopted for movie and song titles in the last few 
years.  I was shocked when I checked Google and found 4.2 million references! 
According to Safire, the
re is no one definitive meaning for the phrase.  It can serve as the 
equivalent of the politician’s “no comment.”  It can be used to express “philosophical resignation 
over a disappointment.”  Or it can be “a mild put-down, as if to say, ‘That’s all you can expect.’”  
Safire concluded his column with another possible meaning: “que sera sera” (what will be will 
be), which was the title of a hit song by Doris Day when I was ten.  But that interpretation 
suggests a fatalism and inability to affect the outcome that I don’t associate with the phrase. 
I took Peter’s use of the phrase in 1995 – and I’m using it in this mem
o – to mean something 
very different: recognition and acceptance of today’s givens . . . but not necessarily of the end 
result.  What’s past is past and can’t be undone.  It has led to the circumstances we now face.  All 
we can do is recognize our circumstances for what they are and make the best decisions we 
can “given the givens.”   
URoots in Philosophy 
In the mid-’60s, W
harton students had to have a non-business minor, and I satisfied the 
requirement by taking five courses in Japanese studies.  These surprised me by becoming the 
highlight of my college career and contributing to my investment philosophy in a major way.   
Among the values prized in early Japanese culture was mujo.  Mujo was defined classically for 
me as recognition of  “the turning of the wheel of the law,” implying acceptance of the 
inevitability of change, of rise and fall.  
This sense of accepting and “going with” the envir
onment and the changes that take place there – 
rather than insisting that it stay the same and attempting to impose our will on it – was captured 
for me in a quotation from Lao-Tzu (I found it in the March letter from Rimrock Capital, which 
Paul Westhead left Oaktree in 2004 to head): 
2006 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.All Rights Reserved

To be strong you have to be like water: if there are no obstacles, it flows; if there 
is an obstacle, it stops; if a dam is broken, then it flows further; if a vessel is 
square, then it has a square form; if a vessel is round, then it has a round form; 
because it is so soft and flexible, it is the most necessary and the strongest thing. 
In other words, mujo means cycles will ris
e and fall, things will come and go, and our 
environment will change in ways beyond our control.  Thus we must recognize, accept, cope 
and respond.  Isn’t that the essence of investing? 
UCoping With Cycles 
In the world of investing, (as you’ve heard me say many times) nothing is as dependable as 
cycles.  Fundamentals, psychology, prices and returns will rise and fall, presenting opportunities 
to make mistakes or to profit from the mistakes of others.  They are the givens. 
We cannot know how far a trend will go, w
hen it will turn, what will make it turn, or how 
far things will then go in the opposite direction.  But I’m confident that every trend will stop 
sooner or later.  Nothing goes on forever.  Trees don’t grow to the sky, and neither do many 
things go to zero and stay there.  Success carries within itself the seeds of failure, and failure the 
seeds of success. 
So what can we do about cycles?  If we can’t kn
ow in advance how and when the turns will 
occur, how can we cope?  On this, I am dogmatic:  We may never know where we’re going, 
but we’d better have a good idea where we are.  That is, even if we can’t predict the timing 
and extent of cyclical fluctuations, it’s essential that we strive to ascertain where we stand in 
cyclical terms and act accordingly. 
UWhat Can We Know, and How? 
Even without knowing where we’re going and when, we can deduce lots of valuable information 
about our investment environment.   
First, where do w
e stand in the economic cycle?  Is the economy several years into a recovery 
that may be due for a rest?  Has it leveled out and begun to weaken?  Or has it been weak enough 
long enough that we can reasonably expect recession to give way to recovery? 
Second, how have the markets been performing?  Have they been weak for years, possibly 
pushing prices to bargain basement levels?  Or have they been so strong that we should suspect 
(1) the positives have been fully discounted, (2) several years of potential gains have been
accelerated into the returns to date, and (3) assets today are “priced for perfection”?
Finally, and often most important, how are people around us behaving?  If they’re chastened 
by losses and afraid of the future, there’s reason for us to be optim
istic.  If they’re unworried and 
complacent, that’s something we should worry about.  In the words of my favorite Buffettism, 
2006 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.2All Rights Reserved

“The less prudence with which others conduct their affairs, the greater the prudence with which 
we should conduct our own affairs.” 
Imagine we ran into a visitor from Mars who observed, “I see your economy and markets have 
been doing well for years.  Everyone’s making a ton of money.  No one’s expressing worry or a 
desire to avoid risk.  P/E ratios, buyout prices and private equity leverage ratios are all high.  
Stock buybacks and dividend recaps are adding to leverage and reducing creditworthiness.  
Conferences on hedge funds and private equity are sold out.  Top-performing funds are closed to 
newcomers and new ones start up every day, fully subscribed.  The Greenwich Ferrari dealer has 
a waiting list a year long.”   
Nothing in our favorite Martian’s statements sounds like a prediction.  I
n fact, he hasn’t said 
one word about the future.  But there’s a lot of helpful information there.  My guess is valuable 
inferences could be made about what’s likely to happen next.  If he can see it, so should we.  
And having seen it, we should take appropriately cautious action. 
And the reverse can also be true (although it’s not something I dwell on most of the tim
e or at 
what I think is today’s point in the cycle).  If that Martian came down and saw nothing but weak 
recent returns, widespread disillusionment, disinterest in investing and people waiting for the 
smoke to clear before they’ll commit, we’d probably conclude it’s time for us to step on the gas. 
0BUWhat to Do 
There are few fields in which decisions as to strategies and tactics aren’t influenced by what we 
see in the environment.  Our pressure on the gas pedal varies depending on whether the road is 
empty or crowded.  The golfer’s choice of club depends on the wind.  Our decision regarding 
outerwear certainly varies with the weather.  Shouldn’t our investment actions be equally 
affected by the investing climate? 
Most people strive to adjust their portfolios based on what they think lies ahead.  At the 
same time, however, most people would admit forward visibility just isn’t that great.  
That’s why I make the case for responding to the current realities and their implications, as 
opposed to expecting the future to be made clear. 
In November 2004 I wrote a memo entitled “Risk and Return Today.”  Its thesis was that in most 
asset classes, prospective returns were low and risk premiums were skinny.  On that basis, I 
urged investors to act accordingly, hold reasonable expectations and – especially – decline to 
stretch for higher returns by taking on more risk.  The conclusions are just as clear today: 
When high returns are not in prospect, we shouldn’t invest as if they are.
When safe investments appear unlikely to provide the returns we need, we shouldn’t rush to
riskier investments to get them.
This is especially true when the reward for taking incremental risk is skimpy.
It’s as simple as that.  W
e can’t expect high returns when the market doesn’t offer them.  
Prices won’t fall to levels from which high returns can be expected if most investors are 
2006 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.3All Rights Reserved

willing to settle for less.  To quote Peter Bernstein, “The market’s no
t a very accommodating 
machine; it won’t provide high returns just because you need them.” 
My bottom line, as they might say in the self-help books: Listen to your inner Martian.  
What’s going on usually isn’t that big a mystery.  An overheated environment doesn’t mean the 
market’s going down tomorrow, just as an excess of risk aversion doesn’t signal it’s the absolute 
bottom.  But the circumstances should inform our behavior.  Simply observing what’s going on 
around you and acting accordingly should improve your investment results. 
And the distinctions needn’t be cut too fine.  There can be lots of room for argument between 
“undervalued” and “fairly valued,” or between “fairly valued” and “overvalued” – that’s where 
most of the uncertainty lies.  But it’s unlikely that disciplined investors wi
ll find it hard to choose 
between overvalued and undervalued.  In my opinion, if you’re wracking your brain trying to 
figure out whether something’s overvalued or fairly valued – that is, whether you should sell or 
continue to hold – it’s usually pretty clear that it’s not a buy. 
1BUWhat Is Going On Around Us Today? 
No one I know thinks investors today are acting out of an excess of caution, and I agree.  
Investors have forgotten the losses in stocks, corporate bonds and venture capital earlier this 
decade and consider this a low-risk world (or at least one where risk is clearly worth taking).  
Mark Cutis of Shinsei Bank sent m
e his memo entitled, “Market of no fear!”  I think that’s an apt 
description. 
There’s no reason to think today’
s environment implies high future returns.  Whether it’s 
high P/E ratios, high transaction multiples in buyouts, low bond yields or low capitalization 
rates on real estate (and certainly all of these are interrelated), few markets appear to offer 
bargains.   
People are reporting big gains from private equity and real estate assets they bought cheap in the 
past, levered up in accommodating capital markets and sold at very high prices (read: low 
prospective returns).  But fewer people can claim to be buying in on the cheap today. 
A great deal of what’s happening is related to a glut of capital for investme
nt in non-mainstream 
asset classes.  With no one interested in buying more high grade bonds at yields near 5% or U.S. 
stocks with consensus expected returns of 5-7% or so, capital is bypassing those big markets – or 
perhaps exiting them – and flocking to the smaller alternative markets, raising prices.  I 
understand why people who need 8% or more are looking there for help, but that doesn’t do 
much for the likelihood they’ll get what they’re after.  (More on this later.) 
The skinniness of today’s risk premiums can be observed most clearly in the high yield bond 
m
arket, where prospective returns can be calculated with precision and yield spreads are in the 
vicinity of historic lows, and in certain real estate markets, where actual cash returns are 
similarly low.  But the difficulty of quantifying prospective returns in public and private equity 
doesn’t mean the offerings there are any less paltry.  And, as Alan Greenspan said, “. . . history 
has not dealt kindly with the aftermath of protracted periods of low risk premiums.” 
2006 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.4All Rights Reserved

This is a time for caution, not aggressiveness.  For reaping more than sowing.  I said it 16 and 34 
months ago, and returns in m
any US markets have been paltry since.  Some alternative 
investment returns have been quite good, but high realized returns must never be confused 
with great opportunities to invest more.  High past returns don’t imply high future returns; 
more likely, they’ve borrowed from the future. 
2BUThe Poor Man’s Guide to Market Assessment 
Here’s a simple exercise:  I have listed below a number of market characteristics.  For each pair, 
check off the one you think is most descriptive of today.  And if you find that most of your 
checkmarks are in the left-hand column, as I do, hold on to your wallet. 
Economy:            Vibrant            Sluggish            
Outlook:            Positive            Negative
            
Lenders: Eager Reticent 
Capital markets:  Loose Tight 
Capital:            Plentiful            Scarce            
Terms: Easy Restrictive 
Interest Rates:  Low High 
Spreads:            Narrow            Wide            
Investors:            Optimistic                        Pessimistic            
Sanguine            Distressed            
Eager            to            buy            Uninterested            in            buying            
Asset owners:  Happy to hold  Rushing for the exits 
Sellers: Few Many 
Markets:            Crowded            Starved            for            attention            
Funds: Hard to gain entry Open to anyone 
New ones daily            Only the best can raise money 
GPs hold the cards on terms   LPs have bargaining power 
Recent performance:            Strong            Weak            
Asset prices: High Low 
Prospective returns:  Low High 
Risk: High Low 
Popular qualities:                        Aggressiveness            
            Caution            and            discipline            
Broad            reach            Selectivity            
The right qualities:                        Caution            and            discipline            Aggressiveness            
Selectivity            Broad            reach            
Available mistakes: Buying too much Buying too little 
Paying            up            Walking            away            
Taking            too            much            risk                        Taking            too            little            risk            
2006 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.5All Rights Reserved

3BUAn Inefficient Market in Investment Advice 
Bruce Karsh and I recently had an opportunity to sit down to lunch with Charlie Munger.  As 
usual, our conversation was most enjoyable, straying over a large number of topics.  I think a few 
of them
 – plus some comments from Warren Buffett’s latest annual report – can be woven into 
something of relevance to this memo and of interest to you. 
Bruce started off by observing that with practically everyone able to start up a billion dollar 
hedge fund, and with the leading private equity managers able to raise funds of $10 to $15 
billion, jobs in those fields are in great demand as the way to get rich quick.  It occurred to me 
that if large numbers of people are convinced that a given field is sure to give them instant 
wealth, something must be wrong.  That’s a “bubble expectation.”  Getting rich – if it can be 
accomplished at all – is supposed to come from some combination of proven skill, hard work, 
risk bearing and luck.  No one should be able to count on it, and especially not in the short run.  
And given the operation of market forces, such an opportunity shouldn’t last long. 
Then I remembered that for decades I’ve argued that exceptional risk-adjusted returns can only 
be achieved in inefficient markets, and even then not all the time or by everyone.  And by 
“inefficient markets,” I’ve always meant markets where mistakes are being made.  So if large 
numbers of alternative investment managers and would-be managers are planning on 
getting rich quick, the investment management market must be inefficient: they and/or 
someone else must be making a mistake.  Who else could it be?  Maybe it’s their clients. 
Today, as everyone knows, funds can be raised easily and at sizes no one imagined just three 
years ago.  But assets are no longer as cheap as they used to be, interest rates are no longer as 
low, and the economic recovery isn’t as young.  I recently heard a speech in which a top buyout 
manager said his fund’s goal (per my memory) is to buy companies at fair prices and make them 
worth more.  In the past, he might’ve said they tried to buy companies cheap. 
On the plus side of the ledger for private equity, managers think more like owners than do many 
public company boards; are substantially incentivized to see the funds’ assets appreciate; and 
have the potential to improve their previously undermanaged companies.  On the negative side, 
however, the three of us noted that clients are currently entrusting record amounts of money to 
these managers, along with management fees big enough to allow the managers to get rich 
without making successful investments, as well as a share in transaction fees that have the 
potential to put the interests of fund managers and their clients in conflict. 
I believe the investors in these funds feel they’ll be happy if they can earn net returns in the very 
low double digits.  The modest nature of their aspirations stems from the juxtaposition of (a) the 
perceived inadequacy (mentioned earlier) of the prospective returns on mainstream stocks and 
bonds, (b) the large sums some institutions have to invest, and (c) the 8%-or-better returns that 
pension funds and endowments must achieve if they are to continue business as usual.  This 
combination makes it imperative that they commit to alternative investments and hedge funds, 
and thus tilts the balance of bargaining power over fees to the fund managers.  This, in turn, 
decreases the likelihood that terms will be designed to maximize the clients’ interests.  It also can 
give the managers amounts of capital that pose a problem.  
2006 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.6All Rights Reserved

In his letter discussing Berkshire Hathaway’s 2005 performance, Warren Buffett tells the 
priceless story of the Gotrocks family, which owns all the co
rporations in America and earns all 
the profits.  Over time, individual family members are approached by broker-Helpers, manager-
Helpers and consultant-Helpers, who promise to help them make money (for a fee) by buying 
certain pieces of the empire from their relatives and selling them others.  Eventually they also 
hook up with hyper-Helpers, wearing uniforms saying “Private Equity” and “Hedge Fund,” who 
levy success fees on top of their other charges.  It’s clear that the collective efforts of all the 
Helpers in shuffling assets among Gotrocks family members are unlikely to increase the family’s 
overall wealth (just as is true when companies are sold from one private equity fund to another).  
At the same time, whether they’re successful or not, the costs involved in trying will cause a 
substantial transfer of wealth from the Gotrocks to their “Helpers.”  But that’s the way it is.   
In April 1998 I observed in “Views on Alternative Investments” that some good performing 
managers might choose to “appropriate for themselves a bigger portion of their funds’ superior 
returns.”  This is natural and happens in all businesses where the product is in strong demand.  
But that doesn’t mean buyers should ignore it when it occurs. 
I’m not saying alternative investme
nts and hedge funds won’t provide the returns clients need, or 
that people shouldn’t invest in them.  But realistically assessing the demand for these funds, the 
amounts of money going into them, the market conditions for the underlying asset classes and 
the deals the managers are able to cut for themselves might cause would-be investors to conclude 
the silver bullet still hasn’t been invented.  Participate in alternative investments if you want – 
in fact, Oaktree hopes you’ll keep doing so – but do it with your eyes open.   
Charlie ended the lunch by urging us to create reasonable expectations among our clients and 
treat them well.  We promised to try. 
*     *     *
None of us can individually influence economic or market conditions.  Neither, I think, can we 
accurately see what lies ahead.  But it’s possible to derive inferences from the recent past and 
the present that improve our judgments and actions regarding the future.  It’s simply 
essential that we be aware of what’s going on around us.  After all, who can argue with the 
statement “it is what it is”? 
Facing up to reality is what Warren Buffett’s doing when he says “W
e used to find it easy to buy 
dollars for fifty cents.  Today we’re trying hard to find dollars we can buy for eighty cents.”  (He 
also told me he has an 800 number for anyone who knows where 80-cent dollars can be found.)  
Recognizing and accepting these things when they’re true isn’t pleasant, but there is no 
prudent alternative. 
Oaktree tries hard to take note of prevailing market conditions, communicate what’s going on 
and behave as contrarians.  We try to raise bigger funds and buy more aggressively when we 
think others are leaving bargains on the table and do the opposite when they’re not.  It doesn’t 
always work, but it usually beats the alternative. 
March 27, 2006 
2006 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.7All Rights Reserved

Memo to: Oaktree Clients  
From: Howard Marks  
Re: 
Returns, Absolute Returns and Risk 
UWhat’s In a Name? 
My memos often touch on the subject of investors’ foibles, one of the worst of which consists of 
their tendency to pay too much attention to labels (and too little to substance). 
Enthusiasm for “growth stock investing” carried investors to the ridiculous conclusion that
for the stocks of the fastest-growing companies, no price is too high.  That was just before
the “nifty-fifty” stocks of America’s best companies lost up to 90% of their value in 1973-74.
“Portfolio insurance” assured investors they could participate fully in stock market gains with
protection against declines if they would simply commit to automatically enter sell orders
pursuant to an algorithm.  But in the crash of October 1987, investors found themselves
unable to make those sales, and the ineffectiveness of the “insurance” (combined with the
outsized positions it had encouraged) cost them dearly.  And at any rate, portfolio insurance,
like any mechanical risk-limiting device, should have been expected to limit long-term return
as well as risk.  After all, there rarely is a free lunch.
“Market neutral” funds were supposed to be insensitive to market fluctuations, but the so-
described Granite Fund of mortgage-backed securities melted down in just a few weeks when
it turned out not to be insulated from the rapid rise of interest rates in 1994.
“High yield bonds” drew
 people in, just as “junk bonds” had scared them away.  One of my
favorites was the mutual fund investor who said in 1990, “I thought it was a high yield bond
fund; I never would have invested if I’d known it was a junk bond fund.”
“Gonna change the world” is what people be
lieved about e-commerce and the Internet.  A
few of the companies did, as had pioneers in radio and airlines.  However, “change the
world” proved once again to be far from synonymous with “make money for investors.”
Today, of course, almost everyone wants to invest in “hedge funds” . . . even though almost
nobody can define them.  In 2005, the average returns for the best and worst performing
hedge fund categories were 17.4% and -2.6%.  Clearly, then, the term “hedge fund” cannot
be much help in the selection of investment vehicles.  Economist Brad Setser was quoted in
The Wall Street Journal of May 31 as posing and answering his own question: “I thought
hedge funds were supposed to be hedged.  I fully realize . . . that in many ways the name
‘hedge fund’ doesn’t tell you much about what a fund does.”
2006 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.All Rights Reserved

The bottom line is that, in the world of investing, words mean almost nothing.  All that matters is 
what you’re buying, the price you’re paying for it, and the risk that it will fail to deliver all you 
expect.   No weight should be attached to what something’s called, as labels alone have little 
significance with regard to
 risk and return.   
UAsset Class Returns 
Importantly in this connection, I continue to insist that no asset class and no investment 
technique possesses a natural or embedded rate of return.  Fixed income comes closest, with 
its promise of interest and the repayment of principal.  But for the holder of a 20-year bond, most 
of the total return over its lifetime will come from “interest on interest” – the interest that is 
earned on interest payments that have been received – and this will vary with rates.  Thus, even 
in fixed income instruments (other than zero-coupon bonds), the return is far from intrinsic. 
And from there, the connection between an asset class label and a prospective rate of return 
grows more and more tenuous.  What’s the return on S&P 500 stocks?  If you had asked 100 
institutional investors and consultants in 1999, virtually all of them would have said 9-11%.  Ask 
them today and they’re likely to say 5-7%.  What changed?  Not the asset class itself, but 
opinions surrounding it.  Obviously, meanings ascribed to words alone often fail to hold up. 
For a final example, what about the asset-class return on private equity?  This strikes me as an 
even more unreliable concept.  The return on a private equity investment will come from the 
combination of (a) the potential of the underlying company and (b) the ability of the manager to 
identify the opportunity, buy the company at a good price, make it a better company, and sell it 
at higher valuation parameters than it was bought for.  Certainly all of the elements included in 
“b” are highly dependent on the manager’s skill and have little or nothing to do with the fact that 
the investment belongs to a given asset class. 
UAbsolute-Return Investing 
My memos are often sparked by something I stumble on, and this one is no exception.  The 
prompt ca
me from “The Myth of the Absolute-Return Investor” by M. Barton Waring and 
Laurence B. Siegel (Financial Analysts Journal, March/April 2006).   
Many people talk today about absolute-return investing and say they want to put money with 
absolute-return funds and managers.  But as W
aring and Siegel indicate, there’s no broad 
agreement on what that means.  They start their article by citing a few popular definitions for 
absolute-return investments, which seem to be distillable to investments possessing the 
potential for positive returns regardless of general market conditions.   
In my opinion, if you’re interested in absolute return investing, you should be looking for a 
steady outcome rather than responsiveness to ma
rket conditions.  In this context, I tend to think 
of  “absolute” along the lines suggested by one of the many definitions in Webster’s Dictionary: 
“free of external references or relationships.”   
2006 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.2All Rights Reserved

When one of the investment committees I’m on decided to increase the portfolio’s commit
ment 
to “absolute-return hedge funds” several years ago, the general consensus was that we wanted 
funds that would reliably deliver 9-10% or so.  We wouldn’t expect to do much worse regardless 
of how badly the markets performed, and we wouldn’t be surprised if we failed to do much better 
when the markets rose.  In other words: a steady, healthy return (implying good relative 
performance in bad times), but consequently with the likelihood of lagging the markets 
when they do well.  Raise your hand if you agree. 
 
But problems arise.  Most hedge funds do better in good years than bad, implying that they’re 
not really insensitive to market developments.  Most hedge fund managers would acknowledge 
that their returns are derived from a combination of beta and alpha (that is, from market return 
plus the skill they bring to the investment process).  And as long as beta plays a meaningful part, 
an investment’s return can’t really be described as “absolute.”   
 
Waring and Siegel argue that there’s no such thing as absolute investing, in that the alpha it aims 
to capture arises from relative decisions that are the basis for all active management.  By this 
they mean that active management consists of trying to overweight (in relative terms) the things 
in a benchmark or market that will do better and underweight the things that will do worse, and 
by having more exposure to the benchmark or market in good times and less in bad times.  
These, they argue, are relative investing decisions. 
 
No wonder we could not sensibly define absolute-return investing: There is no 
such thing.  The term is intended to capture investor attention by offering an 
intuitively appealing alternative to the disciplines required by relative-return 
investing, but at the end of the day it delivers beta returns plus or minus relative 
(alpha) returns . . .   It may appear to be a distinct type of investing, but if there is 
a distinction, it is a distinction without a difference.   
 
I think Waring and Siegel go too far, and some of this feels like wordplay.  You can call trying to 
buy the good and avoid the bad “relative investing,” because the decisions are made relative to 
the makeup of a market or benchmark.  And it’s true, as Sid Cottle (of Graham, Dodd and Cottle) 
put it to me thirty years ago, that “investment is the discipline of relative selection.”  But 
“relative” is just a word.  The quest for better portfolios doesn’t necessarily make all active 
investors “relative investors” in the index-centric sense of the term. 
 
Waring and Siegel insist “the notion that every return has a beta component and an alpha 
component applies to any portfolio.”  And as they describe Bill Sharpe as saying, “The return on 
any, repeat any, portfolio consists of a market part and a nonmarket part.”  However, there are 
investors and funds whose goal it is to buy the good and avoid the bad and, 
Uat the same timeU, to 
minimize the effect of general market fluctuations on their returns.  They want to bring that beta 
term as close as possible to zero, and some are able to pull it off – more or less. 
 
So I think “absolute return” is a relative term, not – pardon me – an absolute one.  But it’s still 
potentially useful.  To me absolute-return investing means – perhaps stating the same thing 
a few different ways – that (a) the contribution to return from alpha should be visibly more 
pronounced than from beta, (b) the return should be significantly steadier than that of the 
2006 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.3All Rights Reserved

market, and (c) there should be a relatively low correlation between the fund’s return and 
the relevant market returns.  We just shouldn’t expect the correlation to be zero. 
 
 
UHedge Fund = Absolute Return = Market Neutral? 
 
Are hedge funds absolute return vehicles?  According to the article that inspired this memo, 
“Today, the term ‘absolute return’ seems to be used most often to describe what wealthy 
individual investors have always called hedge funds.”  I do hear a lot of people use the terms 
somewhat interchangeably.  For that reason, I’d like to spend a few paragraphs exploring just 
how “absolute” hedge fund returns really are, with data from Credit Suisse/Tremont. 
 
Here are the average returns on three hedge fund categories: 
 
 UCredit Suisse/Tremont Hedge Fund Index 
      
         Overall                  Equity                  Long/Short         
(total return in %) 
UAverage UMkt Neutral  UEquity 
    
1994-2005                 10.7%                                  9.9%                                  11.9%                 
 
Certainly these funds satisfied the 9-10% goal expressed above for absolute returns . . . or did 
they?  A couple of years ago, I had some fun asking how often the annual return on the S&P 500 
had fallen within what was then thought to be the “normal” 8-12% range.  Now let’s do the same 
for hedge funds: in how many of the last twelve years was the average return on these three 
hedge fund indices between 8% and 12%?  The answer for each index: just once or twice. 
 
Take the “market neutral” sector.  Its average return, at 9.9%, was square in the desired range, 
and its annual returns were the least variable of the three hedge fund sectors, as one would 
expect.  But was it really market neutral?  In the period 1995-2000, the average market neutral 
fund returned 14.3%, with yearly returns ranging from 11.0% to 15.3%.  In the slower period 
2001-05, the average fund returned 7.3%, with yearly returns ranging between 6.1% and 9.3%.  
The annual returns within each sub-period were quite steady despite the market’s fluctuations 
(and never negative, which was quite an accomplishment).  But certainly the average varied 
greatly from period to period, and it fell between 8% and 12% only twice in those twelve years.  
Even the relationship that these funds’ returns are supposed to bear to Treasury bill returns (e.g., 
“T-plus-500”) seems to have been achieved on average but not with consistency.  Bottom line: 
the returns on “market neutral” hedge funds are not immune to external developments.  
 
Moving from market neutral funds to equity long-short funds and hedge funds in general, the 
table below shows returns for two pairs of back-to-back years in which the stock market boomed 
and busted. 
2006 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.4All Rights Reserved

 
    UUp-and-down        UDown-and-up 
      
(total return %) 
U1999 U2000  U2002 U2003 
      
Hedge Fund Average 23.4%4.8%     3.0% 15.4% 
Long/Short Equity Avg 47.2 2.1  -1.6 17.3 
      
S&P 500 21.0 -9.1  -22.1 28.7 
 
Investors were glad to be in these funds rather than the S&P 500, as the returns were much 
steadier for the hedge funds than for the market and higher overall.  But does the fact that losses 
were minimized or avoided in the down years mean that hedge funds provide absolute returns?  
That depends on your criteria for “absolute.”  If “insensitive to market movements” or “free of 
external references or relationships” are among them, they do not meet the standard.   
 
According to The New Yorker of May 22, 2006, “A recent paper by the economists Burton 
Malkiel and Atanu Saha . . . showed that the range of performance among hedge-fund managers 
was much wider than among mutual-fund managers . . .”  And Dow Jones estimates that the 
average equity long/short hedge fund lost 5% last month.  So not consistent from fund to fund, 
and not consistent over time.  Finally, research has shown that significant beta exposure is 
embedded in many hedge funds.  In the spring 2004 Canadian Investment Review, Dominic 
Clermont of TD Asset Management reported the following findings:  
 
Over the 1994-2000 period, the aggregate hedge fund index had a market 
exposure (beta) of 0.37.  Thus, on average, a significant portion of hedge fund 
managers’ returns came from market exposure.  Some hedge fund strategies, such 
as emerging market hedge funds, had a much higher beta of 0.74.   
 
These observations certainly call into question the absoluteness of hedge fund performance.  
 
 
UWhat Do Investors Want? 
 
That’s a trick question, because the answer is usually heavily reliant on investors’ recent 
experience.  When market performance has been good, they want participation going forward.  
But when performance has been bad, they demand protection. 
 
An endowment portfolio that delivered 15% per year in the late 1990s was described as 
disappointing, because many others made 20%-plus.  But a portfolio that made 2% in the first 
few years of this decade was lauded, because most lost money.  So people can feel good about 
2% and bad about 15%.  That’s human nature for you (and it shows why things other than 
absolute return matter . . . and perhaps why “common sense” is such an oxymoron). 
 
It also shows how danger creeps into markets.  When everything’s been going swimmingly, 
investors forget about risk and want a full ride on the bandwagon.  Seldom do they express 
concern about the fact that good past performance implies elevated asset prices, and maybe low 
returns and high risk going forward.  By the same token, on the heels of market losses, investors 
2006 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.5All Rights Reserved

tend to pull in their horns and opt for safety – even though the best buying opportunities usually 
grow out of market dislocations.  In this regard, short-term hindsight is worse than no help – it’s 
a hindrance.  And it’s what makes contrarian investing effective. 
 
Investors d
on’t want the same thing at all times, fluctuating in their appetites as they do.  
This tells me they won’t always be satisfied with so-called absolute returns, even if they can 
be achieved.   
 
Maybe they just want it all.  In an old commercial, the multi-talented Deion Sanders was asked 
“Which would you rather play, baseball or football?” and he’d say “Both.”  “Offense or 
defense?”  “Both.”  When I ask would-be investors whether they want upside potential or 
downside protection, they often answer “Both” . . . only half kidding, I think. 
 
 
UWhat Should Investors Want? 
 
Of course, I think investors should pursue superior risk-adjusted performance.  The goal of 
many investors – higher highs and higher lows – just isn’t practical.  If you emphasize offense, 
you’re likely to see higher highs and lower lows.  And if you choose defense, you should get 
higher lows but also lower highs.  It takes a lot of skill to produce anything else. 
 
The quest for what I think most people mean by absolute investing – decent highs and lows that 
aren’t low – is not unreasonable.  But I still think (a) delivering that kind of performance requires 
a lot of skill, (b) most investors can’t do it, and (c) the ones who can won’t be found by picking 
funds according to their labels, but as a result of a thorough and difficult study of managers and 
their abilities. 
 
At Oaktree, we constantly tell people the following: 
 
 In good times, it’s good enough to be average.  At first glance, that seems like a heretical 
and far-too-modest goal.  But during good times, the average investor makes a lot of money; 
why shouldn’t “average” be good enough? 
 While above average returns are always nice, why would anyone put an emphasis on beating 
the market when the market does well?  What makes it worth taking the higher risk – and 
holding the idiosyncratic portfolio – that’s required for outperformance in a rising market? 
 On the contrary, in a rising market, mere participation should be good enough; out- 
performance seems superfluous. 
 There is a time when it’s essential that we outperform, and that’s in falling markets.  
Our clients don’t want to bear the full brunt of a market decline, and neither do we.   
 In order for outperformance in bad markets to be achieved, a portfolio has to carry so much 
downside protection that it can render outperformance on the upside hard to achieve.  It 
would be nice to be able to do both, but it’s challenging. 
 If we can just accomplish these two goals – market performance (or a bit better) in good 
times and highly superior performance in bad times – we’ll end up with above average 
performance over full cycles; below average volatility; outperformance in tough times 
(when it really matters); enough resolve to be able to resist selling out at cyclical lows; 
and a favorable investing experience overall. 
2006 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.6All Rights Reserved

 
These goals may seem modest at first glance, but few investors have been capable of meeting 
them for periods spannin
g multiple decades.  They’re the goals we’ve set for ourselves, and 
we’re proud to have reached them thus far.   
 
 
UThe Role of Risk Management 
 
The key to achieving superior returns in bad times (and especially to doing so without 
stripping a portfolio of its potential to make money in good times) is found in the ability to 
control risk.  It’s not a matter of finding winners, but of building a portfolio where upside 
potential is accompanied by downside protection – no mean feat. 
 
In the investment world, we hear a lot more about achieving returns than we do about controlling 
risk.  But as you explore the higher reaches of the profession – as you move into the hedge fund 
world, for example – the latter grows in importance.  Ultimately, the key is to be able to manage 
risk well enough that upside can be attempted without commensurate exposure to downside. 
 
The subject of risk control – and, especially, the process of assessing who does it well – is 
extremely thorny.  When I wrote the memo “Risk” in February, I thought I had hit on something 
when I observed that risk is not measurable even after the fact.  Now I want to take that thought a 
little further. 
 
 
UDefining “A Good Job” 
 
There are reasons why the headlines each year go to the person who achieved the highest 
return, not the person who best managed risk.  The first is that people care more about 
return and are more titillated by it.  But the second is that it can be far from obvious who 
did the best job of risk management.  Different investors can define investment risk 
differently, but if it isn’t the same as inter-month or inter-year volatility – and I’m convinced it’s 
not – then it can’t be easily observed and quantified.  This is especially true in good years, when 
risk remains invisible. 
 
One portfolio manager makes 10% and another makes 15%.  Who did the better job?  When I 
attended the University of Chicago in 1967, I was taught that in order to decide how well a 
portfolio had performed, you have to assess how much return was achieved 
UandU how much risk 
was borne.  That still makes sense to me.  How much risk did a manager take?  Which manager’s 
risk-adjusted return is higher?  It can be hard to judge these things, but investors shouldn’t wait 
for a down year to attempt an answer.   
 
Modern portfolio theory and the efficient market hypothesis define risk as volatility and tell us 
that markets price assets so they’ll offer returns that are proportional to their risk, no more and no 
less.  For this reason, they say, superior risk-adjusted returns cannot be achieved.  The beauty of 
inefficient markets – to the extent they exist – lies in the belief that this rule need not hold: that 
you can get more return than is justified by the risk. 
 
2006 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.7All Rights Reserved

In efficient markets, all assets line up so that there’s a fixed relationship between return and risk, 
with no outliers.  Risk and return are linked, and investors’ results invariably fall along the line. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In inefficient markets, mistak
es are made, such that risk and return need not be strictly 
proportional.  Some investment merit is overrated, and some opportunities are overlooked.  As a 
result, it becomes possible to achieve superior 
UandU inferior risk-adjusted returns. 
Risk
Better
Worse
Risk
Return 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Return
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Not everyone quite understands this point, but I feel even those who do often fail to appreciate 
all of the implications.  Most observers think the advantage of
 inefficient markets lies in the fact 
that a manager can take the same risk as a benchmark, for example, and earn a superior rate of 
return.  The following graph presents this idea and depicts the manager’s “alpha,” or value added 
through skill.   
2006 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.8All Rights Reserved

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This manager has done a good job, but I think this is only half the story – and for me the 
uninteresting half.  An ineffici
ent market can also offer the ability to achieve the same return 
as the benchmark while taking less risk, and I think this is a great accomplishment.  It 
provides the foundation for achieving the performance goals enumerated on page 6. 
Portfolio 
Risk 
Benchmark 
Value 
Added 
Benchmark 
Portfolio 
Value 
Added 
Return 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Return 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Risk 
 
 
 
Here the manager’s value added comes not through higher return at a given risk, but 
through reduced risk at a given return.  This, too, is a good job – maybe even a better one.   
 
2006 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.9All Rights Reserved

Some of this is semantic and depends on how you look at the graphs.  But because I think 
fundam
ental risk reduction can provide the foundation for an extremely successful investing 
experience, this concept should receive more attention than it does.  How do you enjoy the full 
gain in up markets while simultaneously being positioned to achieve superior performance 
in down markets?  By capturing the up-market gain while bearing below-market risk. 
 
The “best investor” profiled by the media each year is usually the one with the highest return.  
Risk control is rarely lauded, in part because it’s often invisible.  But that doesn’t mean it’s 
unimportant.  Most of the investing careers that produce the best records are notable at least 
as much for the absence of losses and losing years as they are for spectacular gains.  The 
challenge is that these virtues usually become apparent only in big downdrafts.  But certainly 
they figure greatly in the long term. 
 
 
UPortable Alpha 
 
Along with absolute-return investing and hedge funds, “portable alpha” is another big deal today.  
It’s often offered up as the next “silver bullet” – a surefire way for investors to achieve their 
goals without fear of disappointment.  So I want to give you my take on this phenomenon – 
making clear, as usual, that I’m a mere observer, not an expert. 
 
Portable alpha proposes the following:  Suppose, for example, you want to invest $100 million in 
mainstream stocks, and you also want alpha, leading to superior risk-adjusted returns.  The 
problem is that, traditionally, investors wanting to invest in a given asset class have been 
restricted in their search for alpha to managers operating in that class.  But if you acknowledge 
that alpha is hard to achieve in mainstream stocks given the high degree of market efficiency, 
you can use portable alpha to “transport alpha” earned in any other asset class to the portion of 
your portfolio allocated to mainstream stocks.    
 
So you give up on finding your alpha in the mainstream stock market and pursue it by 
assembling a “value-added” portfolio of funds run by highly skilled managers in a wide variety 
of markets – probably in alternative investing fields such as hedge funds, private equity, 
commodities, etc., and probably not in mainstream stocks.  Then you assess how much market 
exposure is embedded in the value-added funds and, using derivatives such as futures, swaps and 
options, you add market exposure until the beta of the total portfolio equals the beta of $100 
million of stocks.  In this example, the market exposure implicit in the derivatives plus the funds 
gives you the return on a $100 million passive portfolio of stocks, and the skillful management 
of the funds gives you their managers’ value added.  The sum of the two achieves your goal: a 
$100 million position in stocks with alpha. 
 
Any time Wall Street packages existing elements to produce a surefire solution, my first 
thought is “alchemy!”  I don’t want to be accused of neophobia – fear of anything new – but I 
also doubt that sure things come along very often. 
 
Do I believe that over time a combination of derivatives plus hedge funds can outperform the 
same sum invested with traditional managers? Absolutely . . . but not necessarily for the reason 
advanced by the advocates.  And that brings me back to the subject of absolute return. 
2006 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.10All Rights Reserved

 
Value-added funds that generate alpha clearly are an essential ingredient if portable alpha is 
going to work.  Many managers claim the ability to generate alpha based on their skill, 
experience and access to alpha-generating strateg
ies.  But only the best will prove able to 
accomplish the difficult task of obtaining true alpha, after returns have been adjusted to 
recognize embedded beta bets.  Thus real alpha may not always be responsible for portable 
alpha’s contribution. 
 
In my opinion, a more common reason for a portable alpha portfolio to deliver higher returns 
over time may be that it entails leverage.  Because the value-added funds may not be as “market 
neutral” or “absolute return” as is thought – and because portable alpha managers may fail to 
properly adjust for embedded betas – the market exposure delivered by the total portfolio can 
end up being more than would be entailed in its benchmark (e.g., a traditional long-only stock 
portfolio).  In that case, the portable alpha portfolio will represent a leveraged position.  (That is, 
the sum of the beta on the derivatives plus the beta on the funds may exceed the beta of a 
traditional stock portfolio.) 
 
If that’s true, the portable alpha portfolio should provide higher returns in up markets than the 
traditional portfolio.  This will be so as long as traditional managers’ alphas aren’t sufficient to 
offset both the leverage and the value-added fund managers’ alphas (which everyone assumes is 
out of the question given today’s belief in alternative funds and disrespect for traditional 
investing).  But the portable alpha portfolio may lose more in down markets unless the 
value-added fund managers’ alpha exceeds the traditional managers’ alpha by enough to 
offset the increased losses that can stem from a portable alpha portfolio’s leveraged market 
exposure.  
 
Now then, if pension funds or endowments aren’t permitted to borrow to achieve leverage and 
want to increase market exposure this way, I say “have at it.”  But they should call it what it is, 
rather than insist that they’re combining 2 plus 2 and getting 5.   
 
And remember that even after a portable alpha program has been in place for a period of years 
and produced results ahead of its benchmarks, it may not be possible to accurately assess 
whether the advantage came from the skill of the value-added managers, the effectiveness of the 
portable alpha approach, or leveraged market exposure.  Because risk often is truly invisible, you 
can’t always tell how much market risk you bore, and thus whether the key was really alpha or 
beta. 
 
Portable alpha has the potential to improve results – in good markets and generally over time 
(since markets usually go up).  But it won’t do so in all markets – or do so on a risk-adjusted 
basis – unless the person given the job of structuring the portable alpha portfolio can (a) identify 
and access value-added funds that truly are capable of generating alpha, (b) accurately gauge 
their embedded risk, and (c) properly structure the overall portfolio.  
 
Outstanding managers may be able to satisfy the criteria for success enumerated just above, but 
that doesn’t mean they’ll do it all the time.  And there’s no assurance that less capable managers 
will do it even on average.  So, once again, the mere term “portable alpha” doesn’t hold the 
key to success.   Success will only be found in execution of the concept by managers 
2006 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.11All Rights Reserved

possessing rare skill.  To think every would-be purveyor of portable alpha will be able to do 
it consistently is, like so many other things in my investment experience, too good to be 
true.  Without great execution, “portable alpha” is just one more seductive label. 
 
 
*     *     * 
 
 
No market is entirely efficient and none is entirely inefficient.  It’s all a matter of degree.  In the 
same way, few if any funds are entirely market neutral, and even those that aim for absolute 
returns will demonstrate considerable susceptibility to market fluctuations. 
 
A lot depends on your preference for offense (which usually leads investors to non-hedged or 
non-absolute investing) versus defense (for which managers emphasizing risk control – like 
some hedge funds – may be best suited).  In the long run, it comes down to identifying managers 
who employ the style of investing that appeals to you and are capable of living up to your 
expectations.  Not that complicated, but far from easy. 
 
 
June 13, 2006 
2006 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.12All Rights Reserved