Memo to: Oaktree Clie
nts 
From: Howard Marks  
Re: Everyone Knows  
_____________________________________________________________________________ 
par·a·dox n  1 a seemingly absurd or self-contradictory statement that is or may 
be true . . . 4 an opinion that conflicts with common belief.  (Collins English 
Dictionary) 
I’m sometimes asked to speak about investing with the choice of topic wide open.  I like to begin 
by saying the thing I find most interesting about investing is how paradoxical it is: how often the 
things that seem most obvious – on which everyone agrees – turn out not to be true.   
I’m not saying accepted investment wisdom is sometimes valid and sometimes not.  The reality 
is simpler and much more systematic:  What’s clear to the broad consensus of investors is 
almost always wrong.   
First, most people don’t understand the process through which something comes to have 
outstanding moneymaking potential.  And second, the very coalescing of popular opinion 
behind an investment tends to eliminate its profit potential. 
I’ve been saving up ideas for a memo about how often the investing herd is wrong and accepted 
wisdom should be bet against.  Then along came the March 1 issue of Mark Faber’s “Gloom, 
Boom and Doom Report” and its lead quotation from William Stanley Jevons (1835-1882).  
Another chance for someone else to help me say it better, this time from 100-plus years ago:  
As a general rule, it is foolish to do just what other people are doing, because 
there are almost sure to be too many people doing the same thing. 
“Common Sense” and Other Oxymorons
 
Take, for example, the investment that “everyone” believes to be a great idea.  In my view 
by definition it simply cannot be so.   
If everyone likes it, it’s probably because it has been doing well.  Most people seem to
think outstanding performance to date presages outstanding future performance.
Actually, it’s more likely that outstanding performance to date has borrowed from the
future and thus presages sub-par performance from here on out.
If everyone likes it, it’s likely the price has risen to reflect a level of adulation from which
relatively little further appreciation is likely.  (Sure it’s possible for something to move
from “overvalued” to “more overvalued,” but I wouldn’t want to count on it happening.)
If everyone likes it, it’s likely the area has been mined too thoroughly – and has seen too
much capital flow in – for many bargains to remain.
2007 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.All Rights Reserved

If everyone likes it, there’s significant risk that prices will fall if the crowd changes its
collective mind and moves for the exit.
Superior investors know – and buy – when the price of something is lower than it should 
be.  And the price of an investment can be lower than it should be only when most people 
don’t see its merit.  Yogi Berra is famous for having said, “Nobody goes to that restaurant 
anymore; it’s too crowded.”  It’s just as nonsensical to say, “Everyone realizes that 
investment’s a bargain.”  If everyone realizes it, they’ll have bought, in which case the price 
will no longer be low. 
The Anatomy of a Bargain
 
“Is it a good idea?”  That’s what everyone wants to know.  And from time to time, popular 
opinion unites behind an investment, anointing it as a good idea – the next solution – the low-risk 
sure thing – the “silver bullet.”  Often this crowd mentality creates a self-fulfilling prophecy . . . 
for a while. 
I’ve seen it many times in my 39 years in this business: “it’s a good idea to invest in the stocks of 
high-growth companies” (or energy stocks, small companies, disc drive companies, emerging 
markets, venture capital funds, technology stocks, hedge funds, real estate, China and India, or 
private equity).  But just as often, I’ve stated my view:  There’s no such thing as a good idea.  
Only a good idea at a price.  Something can be a very good idea at one price and a very bad 
idea at another. 
Invariably when I hear the media and the herd describe something as a good buy, it’s without 
regard for price.  They never say, “Internet stocks are a good buy at p/e ratios up to 50.”  Or 
“class-A office buildings are a good buy as long as the cap rate exceeds 7%.”  Or “private 
equity’s a good idea at purchase prices below seven times EBITDA.”  Just “it’s a good buy.” 
My response is simple:  There is no investment idea so good that it can’t be ruined by a too-
high entry price.  And there are few things that can’t be attractive investments if bought at 
a low-enough price.   When investors forget these simple truths, they tend to get into trouble. 
How Money Is Made
 
The fact is, there is no dependable sign pointing to the next big moneymaker: a good idea at a 
too-low price.  Most people simply don’t know how to find it.  If someone really knew, why 
would he share his knowledge?  And when the investing herd or some media commentator 
expresses an opinion, they’re invariably pointing in the wrong direction. 
Large amounts of money (and by that I mean unusual returns, or unusual risk-adjusted 
returns) aren’t made by buying what everybody likes.  They’re made by buying what 
everybody underestimates.   
2007 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.2All Rights Reserved

In short, there are two primary eleme
nts in superior investing: 
seeing some quality that others don’t see or appreciate (and that isn’t reflected in the
price), and
having it turn out to be true (or at least accepted by the market).
It should be clear from the first element that the process has to begin with investors who 
are unusually perceptive, unconventional, iconoclastic or early.  That’s why successful 
investors are said to spend a lot of their time being lonely.  As I wrote in “Dare to Be Great,” 
non-conformists don’t get to enjoy the warmth that comes with being at the center of the herd.  
But it should be clear that when you’re one of many buying something, it’s unlikely to be a 
special opportunity.  It’s only when few others will buy that you can get a bargain.   
That’s the thinking behind a brilliant observation that I heard in the 1970s, describing the three 
stages of a bull market: 
the first, when a few forward-looking people begin to believe things will get better,
the second, when most investors realize improvement is actually underway, and
the third, when everyone believes things will get better forever.
The loners who buy from a crowd of dispirited sellers can get a good deal – and high returns – 
because they’re few in number and early.  But when every Tom, Dick and Harriet joins the herd, 
after the merits of the situation have become obvious to all, they can’t expect a bargain; the 
merits must be reflected fully – or to excess – in the price.  In fact, each of those latecomers 
bears the risk of being the last to jump on the bandwagon . . . just before it goes off the cliff. 
The Best Companies in America
 
As readers of these memos know, I first worked in the Investment Research Department of First 
National City Bank (now Citibank) in 1968.  Whereas common stocks traditionally were bought 
on the basis of their issuers’ current book value and earnings, “growth investing” recently had 
come into fashion.  Under this new approach, buyers paid higher-than-usual valuation multiples 
for the stocks of “growth companies” in recognition of the above-average rates at which their 
earnings were projected to increase in the future. 
Growth investing reached its zenith in the pursuit of the “Nifty Fifty,” and that’s the style the 
bank pursued to the virtual exclusion of all others.  It consisted of buying the stocks of the best, 
fastest-growing companies in America, companies like IBM, Xerox, Polaroid, Kodak, Hewlett 
Packard, Texas Instruments, Perkin Elmer, Merck, Lilly and Avon.  Each one was a corporate 
icon, or what I call a “head nodder” – one person says “Xerox” and everyone else nods and says 
“great company.”  Head nodders are like silver bullets: always the subject of broad, 
unquestioning adoration, and thus invariably overpriced. 
The trap, of course, is that when everyone agrees something’s a great company, it invariably 
comes at a great-company price.  Some will turn out to actually be great companies, but the 
2007 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.3All Rights Reserved

buyers of their stocks have already paid in full for greatness.  Others will disappoint, and the 
stock of a disappointing company that’s been bought at a great-com
pany price can be a disaster. 
By 1970, the scene had been set for just such a development by the Nifty Fifty investors’ attitude 
toward valuation: “These companies are so good, and growing so fast, that there’s no such 
thing as a price that’s too high.  If the price seems excessive given this year’s earnings, just 
wait; the earnings will grow enough to justify the price.”  Those who participated can say they 
cared about price, but I never heard of anyone refusing to hold those stocks just because they 
were priced too high.  Such discipline is rarely seen during investment manias. 
The rest, as they say, is history.  In the early and mid-70s, the wheels fell off.  Common stock 
investing, which had become extremely popular, fell out of favor.  Business Week ran its famous 
cover story, “The Death of Equities.”  The economy became mired in stagflation.  Great 
companies’ earnings failed to grow and sometimes contracted.  Nifty Fifty stocks that had traded 
at p/e ratios of 80 and 90 fell to p/e ratios of 8 and 9 (really).  And The Wall Street Journal 
eventually ran its customary listing of stocks that had lost 90% – a possible buy signal that 
depressed investors routinely ignore. 
So we had a quick lesson in the folly of buying on supposed merit alone, without regard to price.  
But the lesson continued.  Here in 2007, only a few of those “Best Companies in America” are 
still thought of as such.  In fact, IBM, Xerox, Kodak and Polaroid all became distressed in the 
interim and required turnarounds.  Warren Buffett made a related observation in this year’s 
Berkshire Hathaway Annual Report: “Of the ten non-oil companies having the largest market 
capitalization in 1965 – titans such as General Motors, Sears, DuPont and Eastman Kodak – only 
one made the 2006 list.” 
The lesson is simple: beware sweeping statements, accepted wisdom and eternal verities, 
and look for pearls others haven’t recognized.  
The Worst Companies in America
 
I know I tend to repeat myself in these memos – my wife Nancy never fails to remind me – but I 
don’t think I’ve ever told the whole story of my entry into the world of high yield bonds.   
In 1978, shortly after having organized and begun to manage Citibank’s convertibles securities 
fund, I got a call from the boss:  “There’s some guy named Milken or something who works for a 
small brokerage firm in California.  He deals in ‘high yield bonds,’ and a client wants us to 
manage a portfolio for them; can you find out what they are?”  Obviously, that brief conversation 
changed my life.   
Everyone associates Michael Milken with high yield bonds (no one says “junk” anymore), but 
few people know exactly why or how.  Mike was neither the inventor (first to create) nor the 
discoverer (first to find) of bonds rated below investment grade.  He’s just the person who did 
the most with them.  Here are the facts: 
2007 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.4All Rights Reserved

For as long as bonds have been rated, there’ve been low-rated bonds.  But prior to the late
1970s, non-investment grade bonds couldn’t be issued as such.  Rather, they were “fallen
angels”: bonds issued with investment-grade ratings that were subsequently downgraded due
to deterioration on the part of their issuers.
At Wharton, Mike read a 1958 study by W. Braddock Hickman which showed that over the
period 1900 to 1949, lower-rated bonds had produced higher realized returns on average than
higher-rated bonds.  Sure some low-rated bonds defaulted, but higher yields and lower
purchase prices on the many that didn’t default more than made up for the ones that did.
Mike concluded that low-rated bonds were an overlooked asset class; even for a weak credit,
there had to be some yield that would compensate for the credit risk; thus it should be
possible to issue bonds with speculative ratings; and he could make it happen.
Thus Mike’s contribution consisted of raising the profile of the asset class and proselytizing
for it, making a market in high yield bonds and underwriting new issues.  He wasn’t the only
one, just the most prominent figure by far.  And the expansion of the universe of new issue
high yield bonds from $2 billion to $200 billion that Mike presided over between 1978 and
1990 provided early impetus for the growth of buyout investing into the major activity it is
today.
By the time I got the call described above, Mike had joined Drexel Burnham Lambert, started the 
high yield bond department, moved it to California and begun to underwrite new issue high yield 
bonds for corporate borrowers.  He visited me at the bank in the fall of 1978, and it was even 
more of a learning experience than the one I got from the Nifty Fifty.  Mike’s logic was the 
direct opposite, and to me much more appealing.  Here’s what he told me: 
If you buy triple-A or double-A bonds, there’s only one way for them to go: down.  The
surprises are invariably negative, and the record shows that few top-rated bonds remain so
for very long.
On the other hand, if you buy B-rated bonds and they survive, all the surprises will be on the
upside.
Because the investment process is prejudiced against high yield bonds, they offer yields that
more than compensate for the risk.
Thus you’ll earn a superior yield for having accepted the incremental credit risk, and
favorable developments can lead to capital gains as well.
Your main goal should be to weed out bonds that may default.
But diversification is essential, too, because some of the bonds you hold will default anyway,
and your positions in them mustn’t be large enough to jeopardize the overall return.
What an object lesson!  What an epiphany!  Buy the stocks of the best companies in 
America at prices that assume nothing can go wrong?  Or buy the bonds of unloved 
companies at prices that overstate the risk of default, and from which the surprises are 
likely to be on the upside?  Having seen fortunes lost investing in the best, it seemed much 
smarter to buy the worst at too-
low prices. 
2007 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.5All Rights Reserved

“If we avoid the losers,
 the winners will take care of themselves.”  Sound familiar?  The 
motto we chose for Oaktree was inspired by a lot of people and events, but the morning I spent 
with Mike Milken in 1978 was the biggest single source of inspiration. 
The Perversity of Risk
 
“I wouldn’t buy that at any price – everyone knows it’s too risky.”  That’s something I’ve 
heard a lot in my life, and it has given rise to the best investment opportunities I’ve participated 
in.  In fact, to an extent, it has provided the foundation for my career.  In the 1970s and 1980s, 
insistence on avoiding non-investment grade bonds kept them out of most institutional portfolios 
and therefore cheap.  Ditto for the debt of bankrupt companies: what could be riskier? 
The truth is, the herd is wrong about risk at least as often as it is about return.  A broad 
consensus that something’s too hot to handle is almost always wrong.  Usually it’s the opposite 
that’s true.   
I’m firmly convinced that investment risk resides most where it is least perceived, and vice 
versa:   
When everyone believes something is risky, their unwillingness to buy usually reduces its
price to the point where it’s not risky at all.  Broadly negative opinion can make it the least
risky thing, since all optimism has been driven out of its price.
And, of course, as demonstrated by the experience of Nifty Fifty investors, when everyone
believes something embodies no risk, they usually bid it up to the point where it’s
enormously risky.  No risk is feared, and thus no reward for risk bearing – no “risk premium”
– is demanded or provided.  That can make the thing that’s most esteemed the riskiest.
This paradox exists because most investors think quality, as opposed to price, is the 
determinant of whether something’s risky.  But high quality assets can be risky, and low 
quality assets can be safe.  It’s just a matter of the price paid for them. 
The foregoing must be what Lord Keynes had in mind when he coined one of my favorite 
phrases: “. . . a speculator is one who runs risks of which he is aware and an investor is one who 
runs risks of which he is unaware.”  In 1978, triple-A bonds were considered respectable 
investments, while buying B-rated bonds was viewed as irresponsible speculation.  Yet the latter 
have vastly outperformed the former, few of which remain triple-A today. 
Elevated popular opinion, then, isn’t just the source of low return potential, but also of 
high risk.  Broad distrust, disregard and dismissal, on the other hand, can set the stage for 
high returns earned with low risk.  This observation captures the essence of contrarianism. 
2007 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.6All Rights Reserved

The Unhelpful Consensus 
The bottom line is that what “everyone knows” isn’t at all helpful in investing.  What 
everyone kno
ws is bound to already be reflected in the price, meaning a buyer is paying for 
whatever it is that everyone thinks they know.  Thus, if the consensus view is right, it’s likely 
to produce an average return.  And if the consensus turns out to be too rosy, everyone’s likely to 
suffer together.  That’s why I remind people that merely being right doesn’t lead to superior 
investment results.   If you’re right and the consensus is right, your return won’t be anything to 
write home about.  To be superior, you have to be more right than the average investor.   
Let me give you an outstanding example of a dangerous consensus.  Historic data, buttressed by 
two decades of good returns, produced near unanimity in the late 1990s regarding future equity 
returns.  Ask 100 institutional investors and consultants in 1999, and virtually 100 would say 
“about 11%.”  There was little serious dissent.  As a result, equity allocations were ratcheted up.  
Those who’d fallen behind because they were underweighted in equities earlier in the decade 
capitulated and bought more. 
Where did the support for that 11% number come from?  It’s simple: recent results.  Earlier work 
at the University of Chicago had put the average annual return on stocks closer to 9% into the 
1960s, but a couple of decades of much higher returns pushed the cumulative experience – and 
thus the expectation – toward 11%.  Shouldn’t there have been support apart from experience?  
Was there an underlying economic process that would make stocks worth 11% more each year?  
Couldn’t the last fifteen years, averaging well above 11%, have borrowed from the future by 
pushing up p/e ratios?  Few people inquired.  “You can’t fight the tape,” they said in essence.  
Who was willing to take the risk associated with a below-average weighting? 
Well, the elevated prices produced by that unanimously positive expectation, a reversal of the 
optimism it embodied, and the fact that those above-trend results had in fact borrowed heavily 
from the future all led eventually to the first three-year decline in equities since 1930.  And, not 
surprisingly, to a new consensus.  Now everyone says “about 7%.”  But is today’s consensus any 
more likely to be right?  Or does it just reflect more of that oxymoronic quality, common sense? 
Asset Class Returns
 
Further on the topic of consensus expectations, let me visit the question of whether asset classes 
even “have” expected returns.  I learned from managing fixed income portfolios that bonds come 
closest to having a dependable return.  Over its life, a bond that’s bought at a 10% yield to 
maturity and doesn’t default will return 10%, won’t it?  An obvious truth?  No, actually 
something of a misstatement.   
The majority of the lifetime return on a long-term bond comes not from the promised interest 
payments and redemption at maturity, but from the interest earned on interest payments after 
they’re received.  The yield to maturity at which a bond is bought expresses the overall return 
that will be earned if interest rates don’t change – that is, if interest payments are reinvested at 
the rates prevailing at the time of purchase.  But because interest rates are highly variable, so is 
the “interest on interest” component.  Few non-bond people realize how un-fixed even fixed 
2007 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.7All Rights Reserved

income investing is, and how substantial is the “reinvestm
ent risk.”  And beyond bonds, it’s even 
more up for grabs.   
What rate of return is implicit in equity investing?  Certainly we should look to more than just 
returns over the last ten or twenty years for the answer.  The rate of growth in corporate profits 
provides a clue, but in the short run, changes in p/e ratios tend to swamp changes in profits. 
In 1999, investors asked, “What’s been the return on common stocks?” and were seduced by the 
11% answer propounded by authorities like Prof. Jeremy Siegel in his book, “Stocks for the 
Long Run.”  What they should have asked, however, is, “What’s been the return on common 
stocks bought when the Standard & Poor’s 500 was priced at 29 times earnings?” (which it 
was at the time).   In other words, people made the mistake of believing that common stocks 
have a single rate of return you can depend on, regardless of entry point.  They forgot the great 
extent to which the return on an asset is dependent on the price you pay for it.   
In the March/April 1997 issue of the Financial Analysts Journal, Peter Bernstein set forth a 
helpful way to consider returns from equities – one I’d thought about but had never seen in use.  
He calculated returns on the S&P 500 for periods spanning widely separated dates between 
which the p/e ratio didn’t change.  He called the result “valuation-adjusted long-run equity 
returns.”  In December 2006, he published some interesting results.  With the S&P 500 trading at 
17.2 times earnings, he looked at four periods which had begun with the p/e at the same 17.2 and 
found that the returns over those periods had ranged from 10.4% to 11.1%.   
In other words, over periods when multiples were unchanged, the S&P 500 did deliver roughly 
11%.  And in the very long run, over the course of which the impact of p/e fluctuations is 
watered down, stocks also have returned 11%.  Thus it seemed reasonable for buyers of stocks in 
1999 to expect returns of 11% per year.  But they failed to think about what might happen if p/e 
ratios fell in the short run. 
It shouldn’t take a Ph.D. (or even an MBA) to know that if you buy the S&P in 1999 at a p/e 
ratio of 29, one of the highest multiples ever seen, the p/e ratio could decline and the resulting 
return could be below 11% – well below 11% if it happened quickly.  In 1999, investors derived 
excessive comfort from an optimistic consensus that was based on long-run data.  But in 2002, 
they were licking wounds inflicted in the short run.  It’s worth noting that for the seven years that 
ended March 31, 2007, the annualized return on the S&P 500 was 0.9%.  So much for the 
crowd’s certainty regarding 11%. 
And what about the return on private equity?  Before saying what it’ll be, investors should think 
about where returns come from.  Some markets derive their returns from an underlying process.  
As far as I’m concerned, owning interests in money-making companies and income-producing 
real estate has such an underlying basis for returns, whereas owning gold and art does not. 
Companies produce profits, and thus buying interests in them represents buying into a stream of 
returns.  When a private equity fund buys a company today at nine times EBITDA (which, let’s 
say, equates to eleven times cash flow after capital expenditure needs), that implies a 9% free-
cash-flow return on invested capital – and maybe 5% after fees and expenses.  The rest of the 
return that’s hoped for must come from doing other things: leveraging up the equity at a cost 
2007 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.8All Rights Reserved

below 9%, making the com
pany more productive, or selling it at an increased valuation.  But the 
ability to do these things is either highly dependent on market conditions (leveraging cheap or 
selling dear) or skill-based.  The wide disparity among private equity results for any given period 
of time shows how much they are a function of the skill of the general partners, and thus that 
most of the return on private equity is far from intrinsic to the asset class. 
Everyone Knows
 
Two years ago, the herd knew residential real estate was a can’t-miss way to build wealth.  “You 
can live in it,” “it’s a hedge against inflation,” and “they’re not making any more land” were oft-
recited mantras . . . just as they had been in the mid-1980s (See “There They Go Again,” April 
2005).  After ten years of rapid appreciation, owners of condos felt they had it made, and non-
owners felt they were on the outside looking in.  People lined up to put down deposits on condos 
that hadn’t been built yet, and many assembled portfolios that way. 
No one talks that way anymore.  The air came out of the condo balloon fast once prices stopped 
going up, putting the virtuous circle into a stall.  The cheap financing that appeared to provide a 
ticket to financial security is now seen to have lured many buyers into water over their heads.  
“It can only go up” and “if it stops working, I’ll get out” – two phrases that are heard in 
the course of virtually every financial mania – proved once again to be highly flawed.   
To avoid the trap in residential real estate, one needed a memory of events that occurred 
more than ten years earlier, the ability to understand their implications, and the discipline 
to resist joining the herd.  Many failed the test and succumbed to yet another investment craze. 
Just think about the many things everyone agreed on in the last decade, and how overdone these 
fads turned out to be – or may turn out to be in the future.   
“Everyone” loved emerging markets in the mid-90s, with their concept of per capita
consumption catch-up . . . until the Russian debt debacle and the collapse of Long-Term
Capital Management busted that bubble for a while.
A fellow member of a non-profit investment committee insisted in 1999 that we had to invest
the endowment in a hi-tech fund . . . just before its portfolio lost more than 90%.
Hedge funds were widely touted as the surefire solution to the weakness that stocks
demonstrated in 2000-02, in time to see the average return recede to unexciting single digits.
Great recent performance and a failure to detect risky patterns have cost investors money 
on several recent occasions . . . and always will.  Now silver bullets ranging from private 
equity to art are being touted as ways to make big money without risk . . . ignoring the 
unlikely nature of that proposition, as usual.  There’s plenty of evidence of the popularity of 
these ideas.  Maybe they’ll work forever.  Maybe these trees will grow to the sky.  But if they do, 
they’ll be the first. 
*     *     *
2007 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.9All Rights Reserved

Finally, it’s important to reme
mber that investment trends regularly go to great extremes, 
meaning “overpriced” and “overdone” are far from synonymous with “going down tomorrow.”  
As Lord Keynes said, “The market can remain irrational longer than you can remain solvent.”  
Thus, whatever it is the herd is favoring, a manager might either (a) hold a little to ensure that it 
doesn’t continue doing well without him on board, making constituents question his judgment, or 
(b) avoid holding any, but he should be prepared to look wrong for a while.  Anyone who’s
tempted to blow the whistle on a market trend just because it has gone too far or is priced too
high must bear in mind one of the greatest adages of all: “Being too far ahead of your time is
indistinguishable from being wrong.”
There’s always a period – sometimes a long one – when those who follow the crowd look smart 
and the abstainers look dumb.  But the roles are inevitably reversed in the long run.  Insisting on 
buying value and controlling risk can seem awfully dowdy at times, but for us, there is no 
other way. 
April 26, 2007 
2007 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.10All Rights Reserved

Memo to: Oaktree Clients  
From: Howar
d Marks  
Re: It’
s All Good 
Readers of my m
emos know that one thing I believe in most strongly – and harp on most frequently – 
is the inevitability of cycles.  They’re something we can depend on absolutely.   
Several of my m
emos have dealt with cycles, starting from the very beginning: “First Quarter 
Performance” (April 11, 1991), “Will It Be Different This Time?” (November 25, 1996), “You Can’t 
Predict.  You Can Prepare.” (November 20, 2001) and “The Happy Medium” (July 21, 2004).  I’ve 
said in the past that I consider “You Can’t Predict,” a primer on cycles, to have been one of my best ̧ 
and also that it evoked the least response of any memo in this decade.  Thus I’m offering it as a 
twofer with this memo; copies are available on request at no additional cost. 
I always say that wh
ile we can’t know where we’re going, we ought to know where we are (in 
cyclical terms).  Understanding our environment can help us decide what tactics to employ, how 
aggressive to be, and which potential mistakes we should try hardest to avoid.  Being conscious of 
cycles can be extremely helpful, even if we can’t see the future. 
Thus I’m goi
ng to devote this memo to the cycle that’s been underway for the last few years.  In 
terms of amplitude, breadth and potential ramifications, I consider it the strongest, most 
heated upswing I’ve witnessed.  A lot of this is because people seem to think everything’s good 
and likely to stay that way. 
UCycles in the World of Investing  
The basics of cycles are si
mple.  The economic cycle gives rise to recessions and recoveries, creating 
the business environment.  This produces a business cycle marked by rising and falling sales and 
profits.  The credit cycle swings more radically, such that capital market conditions alternate between 
irrationally generous and unfairly restrictive.  Likewise, market cycles fluctuate much more than do 
the more “fundamental” economic and business cycles, due largely to the volatile cycle in investor 
psychology. 
In this latter regard, I’ll reprint a few p
aragraphs from “First Quarter Performance,” the 1991 memo 
cited above.  I think they capture investors’ pattern of behavior. 
The mood swings of the securities m
arkets resemble the movement of a pendulum.  
Although the midpoint of its arc best describes the location of the pendulum “on 
average,” it actually spends very little of its time there.  Instead, it is almost always 
swinging toward or away from the extremes of its arc.  But whenever the pendulum is 
near either extreme, it is inevitable that it will move back toward the midpoint sooner 
or later.  In fact, it is the movement toward the extreme itself that supplies the energy 
for the swing back. 
2007 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.All Rights Reserved

 
Investment markets make the same pendulum-like swing: 
 
 between euphoria and depression, 
 between celebrating positive developments and obsessing over negatives,  
and thus 
 between overpriced and underpriced. 
 
This oscillation is one of the most dependable features of the investment world, and 
investor psychology seems to spend much more time at the extremes than it does at 
the “happy medium.”  
 
 
UPolar Opposites 
 
My 2004 memo, “The Happy Medium,” took its title from this last phrase and went beyond the three 
listed above to discuss additional pairs of opposites between which the investment pendulum 
oscillates:   
 
 between greed and fear, 
 between optimism and pessimism, 
 between risk tolerance and risk aversion, 
 between credence and skepticism, 
 between faith in value in the future and insistence of concrete value in the present, and 
 between urgency to buy and panic to sell. 
 
I find particularly interesting the degree to which the polarities listed above are interrelated.  When a 
market has been rising strongly for a while, we invariably see all nine of the elements listed first. 
And when the market’s been declining, we see all nine of the elements listed second.  Rarely do we 
see a blend of the two sets, given that the components in each are causally related, with one giving 
rise to the next.   
 
Usually, when either set of polar extremes is in the ascendancy, that fact is readily observable, and 
thus the implications for investors should be obvious to objective observers.  But of course, the 
swing of the market pendulum to one set of extremes or the other occurs for the simple reason 
that the psyches of most market participants are moving in the same direction in a herd-like 
fashion.  Few of the people involved actually are objective.  To continue a thread from my last 
memo, “Everyone Knows,” expecting widespread clinical observation during a market mania 
makes about as much sense as saying “everyone knows the market has gone too far.”  If many 
people recognized that it had gone too far, it wouldn’t be there. 
 
Between the two sets of cyclical extremes, I have no doubt that the environment of the last few 
years has been marked by the elements listed first above, not second: euphoria, greed, 
optimism, risk tolerance and credence; not depression, fear, pessimism, risk aversion and 
skepticism.  Certainly it’s been the recent consensus of investors that, “It’s all good.” 
 
 
2007 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.2All Rights Reserved

UUnusual Breadth 
 
In the past we’ve seen bull markets in equities, commodities and real estate.  And we’ve seen bull 
markets in the U.S., Japan and the emerging markets.  But this time around, we’ve been seeing a 
near-global bull market, where the participating sectors vastly outnumber those left out. 
 
In his April letter to investors, entitled “The First Truly Global Bubble,” Jeremy Grantham summed 
up the worldwide nature of the good times.   
 
Never before have 
UallU emerging countries outperformed the U.S. in GDP growth over 
a 12-month period until now, and this when the U.S. has been doing well.  Not a 
single country anywhere – emerging or developed – out of the 42 listed by The 
Economist grew its GDP by less than Switzerland’s 2.2%!  Amazingly uniform 
strength, and yet another sign of how globalized and correlated fundamentals have 
become, as well as the financial markets that reflect them. 
 
Bubbles, of course, are based on human behavior, and the mechanism is surprisingly 
simple: perfect conditions create very strong “animal spirits,” reflected statistically in 
a low risk premium.  Widely available cheap credit offers investors the opportunity to 
act on their optimism.  Sustained strong fundamentals and sustained easy credit go 
one better; they allow for continued reinforcement: the more leverage you take, the 
better you do; the better you do, the more leverage you take. 
 
A critical part of the bubble is the reinforcement you get for your optimistic view 
from those around you.  And of course, as often mentioned, this is helped along by 
the finance industry, broadly defined, that makes more money when optimism and 
activity are high. . . .  To say the least, there has never ever been anything like the 
uniformity of this reinforcement. 
 
The March issue of Marc Faber’s Gloom, Boom & Doom Report described the pervasiveness of the 
positive effect on markets.  He listed four “bubbles of epic proportions” that he has witnessed: 
metals, mining and energy in the 1970s; Japanese equities and real estate and Taiwanese equities in 
the late 1980s; emerging markets in the 1990s; and TMT at the end of the 1990s.  In contrast to the 
present experience, he pointed out,  
 
. . . all had one common feature: they were concentrated in just one or very few 
sectors of the economic or investment universe and were accompanied by a poor 
performance in some other asset classes. . . .  Currently, looking at the five most 
important asset classes – real estate, equities, bonds, commodities, and art (including 
collectibles) – I am not aware of any asset class that has declined in value since 2002!  
Admittedly some assets have performed better than others, but in general every sort 
of asset has risen in price, and this is true everywhere in the world. 
 
It’s interesting not only to see just about everything rise at the same time, but also to see people act as 
if this is likely to continue for a prolonged period.  Usually that just doesn’t happen. 
 
 
2007 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.3All Rights Reserved

UIt’s Different This Time  
 
My memos are full of quotations, adages and old saws.  I’m attached to a few and tend to use them 
over and over.  Why reinvent the wheel, especially if the old one can’t be improved upon?  Hopefully 
the things I borrow contain enough wisdom to make them worth repeating.   
 
Equally worth repeating are the statements I cite as investor mistakes.  They, too, are highly 
instructive . . . in the sense that they’re heard often and must be recognized for how potentially toxic 
they are.  None is as dangerous as “it’s different this time.”  Those four little words are always 
heard when the market swings to dangerously high levels.  Like so many of the polar opposites 
enumerated above, it’s not just the sign of an absurd condition.  It’s a prerequisite.   
 
I first came across the phrase in what for me was a seminal article, “Why This Market Cycle Isn’t 
Any Different,” by Anise C. Wallace (New York Times, October 11, 1987).  The stock market’s 
rapid ascent at the time was being attributed to (or excused by), among other things, (1) the outlook 
for continued economic growth, given that the economy had learned how to correct itself painlessly, 
(2) the likelihood of continued buying of U.S. stocks by foreign investors piling up dollars with no 
better place to go, and (3) the fact that stocks weren’t overvalued compared to other assets, which 
had also appreciated.   
 
But Ms. Wallace countered as follows:  “No matter what brokers or money managers say, bull 
markets do not last forever.  In general, investment professionals say, cycles and markets differ only 
by degree.”  And of course, in the next eight days the Dow fell 30%.   
 
It wasn’t just 1987.  People also came to believe the business cycle had been tamed in 1928 and in 
the late 1990s.  And wouldn’t you know, I’m hearing it again today: 
 
 The Fed’s skillfully walking the tightrope between stimulus and restrictiveness.  (A few years 
ago people felt Greenspan was indispensable; now there’s suddenly faith in Bernanke.) 
 A service economy is less volatile than a manufacturing-based economy. 
 As the Chinese and Indians get rich, their purchases from us will buoy our economy. 
 
The truth is, we couldn’t have great cyclical extremes if people didn’t occasionally fall for a 
justification that’s never held true before.  How else might investors rationalize holding or 
buying despite highly elevated valuation parameters, low prospective returns and just-plain-
wacky security structures?  I still believe what I wrote in “The Happy Medium”:   
 
Cycles are inevitable.  Every once in a while, an up- or down-leg goes on for a long 
time and/or to a great extreme and people start to say “this time it’s different.”  They 
cite the changes in geopolitics, institutions, technology or behavior that have rendered 
the “old rules” obsolete.  They make investment decisions that extrapolate the recent 
trend.  And then it turns out that the old rules do still apply, and the cycle resumes.  In 
the end, trees don’t grow to the sky, and few things go to zero.  Rather, most 
phenomena turn out to be cyclical. 
 
I’m hearing again – as often in the past – that we’re in a Goldilocks economy.  It’s not so hot that 
there’s risk of inflation accelerating, which would require restrictive measures on the part of the Fed.   
2007 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.4All Rights Reserved

Or so cold that business will slow, with a depressing effect on profits.  No, it’s just right.  Of course, 
this condition has never held for long in the past. 
 
Earlier this year, Kenneth Lewis, chairman of Bank of America, summed it up candidly and simply: 
“We are close to a time when we’ll look back and say we did some stupid things . . .  We need a little 
more sanity in a period in which everyone feels invincible and thinks this is different.” 
 
And while I’m on the subject, I want to offer an important observation.  No matter how 
favorable and steady fundamentals may be, the markets will always be subject to substantial 
cyclical fluctuation.   
UThe reason is simple: even ideal conditions can become overrated and 
therefore overpriced.U  And having reached too-high levels, prices will correct, bringing capital 
losses despite the idealness of the environment (see tech stocks in 2000).  So don’t fall into the 
trap of thinking that good fundamentals = positive market outlook (and especially not forever).  
As I said in “Everyone Knows,” profit potential is all a matter of the relationship between 
intrinsic value and price.  There is no level of fundamentals that can’t become overpriced. 
 
 
UWilling Suspension of Disbelief 
 
One of the key requisites for enjoying a trip to the movies is a willingness to suspend disbelief.  If 
they wanted to, moviegoers invariably could find plot glitches, technological impossibilities or 
historical inaccuracies.  But they tend to overlook them in the interest of having a good time. 
 
Similarly, investors’ recurring acceptance that it’s different this time – or that cycles are no 
more – is exemplary of a willing suspension of disbelief that springs from glee over how well 
things are going (on the part of people who’re in the market) or rationalization of the reasons 
to throw off caution and get on board (from those who’ve been watching from the sidelines as 
prices moved higher and others made money). 
 
The fact is, the higher asset prices go, the more people think assets are worth, and the more eager 
they become to buy them.  A rip-roaring rally fuels buying appetites rather than make people think 
the appreciation may have moved prices to precarious levels.  In the same way, price collapses cause 
people to worry rather than start combing the market for bargains. 
 
In this way, the bullish swing of the investment cycle tends to cause skepticism and risk 
tolerance to evaporate.  Faith, credence and open-mindedness all tend to move up – at just the 
time that skepticism, discrimination and circumspection become the qualities that are most 
needed. 
 
 
UFinancial Innovation  
 
Another element that I notice tends to rise and fall with the cycles is the level of financial innovation.  
Again, this is a cycle that’s easily understood. 
 
Wall Street exists to develop and sell new products, no less so than toothpaste manufacturers 
and movie studios.  So why is it that some periods are rife with innovation and other periods 
totally lacking?  It’s because it’s only in bullish times that investors accept financial inventions.  
When the market’s in an up-swing, people tend to say, “Sure, I’ll give it a chance” or “Good, I’ve 
2007 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.5All Rights Reserved

been looking for new ways to make money.”  But when the market has been moving down and 
people are tallying their losses, they tend to be much less open to new ideas.  In the financial world, 
the mother of invention isn’t necessity, its salability. 
 
In the roaring 1960s we saw Nifty-Fifty investing, dual shares from mutual funds and discounted 
shares issued through unregistered private placements without any mechanism for subsequent 
liquidity.  In the ’80s we saw portfolio insurance – a surefire way to enjoy the appreciation potential 
that comes with large commitments to equities, but with much less risk.  And in the ’90s, no one 
could think of a reason why every dot-com, e-tailer, media aggregation and venture capital fund 
wouldn’t be successful.  Of course, all of these things failed to function as promised and either 
disappeared forever or experienced severe corrections.   
 
And what have we seen in the last few years?  CDOs, CLOs, CPDOs, SPACs and securitizations of 
every type.  In the current environment – marked by decent returns; disinterest in conventional, safe 
assets; and openness to risky investments – few people seem to dwell on the reasons why something 
new might not work.  No one asks why, if a $2 billion fund was successful, a $20 billion fund 
shouldn’t be as well. 
 
Derivatives deserve particular attention in this regard.  On July 8 The Wall Street Journal noted that, 
 
Over the last six years, global futures trading on exchanges has grown nearly 30% a 
year. The total derivatives market is valued at about $500 trillion, four times the value 
of all publicly traded stock and bonds. . . .  The four biggest futures exchanges have 
launched more than 300 new derivatives products in just the last few years . . . 
 
Particularly intriguing, it seems the value of outstanding credit default swaps – insurance against 
defaults among corporate debt instruments – exceeds the value of the instruments insured.  How will 
this work if a wave of defaults occurs?  How well are the provisions of these insurance contracts 
documented?  How readily will the writers of the insurance pay up?  What will be the effect if 
conditions are chaotic?  No one knows the answers to these questions.  Inventions originate in up 
markets, but they’re tested in down markets.  Rarely do they work entirely as hoped. 
 
In down markets, people see potential risks that can’t be argued away.  But in markets like this 
one, they see opportunities they must seize to avoid being left behind.  Thus, like the other 
things I’m discussing, a high level of financial innovation is symptomatic of a market that’s 
been rising for a good while and may be behaving in an overconfident manner. 
 
 
UWhat, Me Worry? 
 
Two recent innovations deserve particular attention here: structured entities and what the British call 
“selling onward.”  Both embody an impractical expectation: that financial engineering can 
eliminate risk.  Combined, they’re particularly dangerous.   
 
In creating structured entities such as CDOs, managers bring together investors with different 
risk/return appetites.  To satisfy those varying appetites, the investors are sold claims with different 
priorities with regard to the entity’s portfolio and cashflows, and with projected returns that are 
proportional.  The managers use the investors’ capital to assemble a portfolio of assets.  And each 
investor receives a security with risk and return tailored to its needs. 
2007 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.6All Rights Reserved

 
It should work . . . in theory.  My biggest knocks on structuring are these:  First, many of the people 
who develop the structured entities and rate their securities know more about probabilities than they 
do about the specific assets in the portfolio, something that’s particularly dangerous when portfolios 
are highly leveraged.  And second, there seems to be a belief that this process – at Oaktree we call it 
“slicing and dicing” – can reduce the overall risk in the system.   
 
If risk is reduced, I’d like to know where the eliminated part goes.  If ten people each hold a share of 
ten highly correlated risky assets, I don’t think the overall system is much less risky than if each of 
the ten people held one entire risky asset.  At the extreme, however, it may be true that risk sharing 
reduces the likelihood that a spate of failures will precipitate a generalized credit crunch. 
 
Selling onward is the process through which the originating of assets and the owning of assets are 
separated.  In the old days, banks made loans and mostly held on to them, syndicating a bit to build 
relationships and limit risk.  Nowadays, banks originate loans largely to generate loan and 
syndication fees, and actually living with the loans is much less prevalent.  After they’re originated, 
assets such as corporate loans, mortgages, auto paper and credit card receivables are often packaged 
and sold, sometimes in the form of securities.  There’s a belief that this process, too, makes the world 
less risky. 
 
I fail to see net benefits here as well.  Instead, I think this process introduces great moral hazard.  
When the people making loans aren’t going to remain dependent on the borrowers they give money 
to, they have little incentive to actively police risk.  Thus I have grave doubts about a lot of the credit 
decisions being made.   
 
For an extreme example, take a look at the subprime mortgage brokers.  Were they motivated to 
make prudent credit decisions?  No; they were motivated to create a lot of paper.  There’s 
something wrong when it’s in someone’s best interests to lend money to unqualified borrowers, 
but this was the case in subprime mortgages.  Obviously this occurred because mortgage brokers 
weren’t risking their own money.  With selling onward so prevalent, an originator just had to hope 
the borrower would make the first few payments, so that delinquencies wouldn’t surface before the 
originator’s repurchase obligation expired and the loans became the buyer’s problem.  How could 
buyers have been silly enough to purchase loans made by brokers operating under this set of 
incentives? 
 
Now, let’s combine structuring and selling onward.  Here’s how I see it working: 
 
 A mortgage broker makes a bunch of loans without knowing much about creditworthiness (think 
about so-called “liar loans”) or caring much about creditworthiness (because he intends to sell 
them momentarily). 
 An investment banker buys a few hundred of these loans, also without knowing much about them 
(because of their sheer numbers), in order to package them into residential mortgage-backed 
securities (RMBS) and sell them onward.  
 An investment manager buys a few dozen RMBS, about which he doesn’t know much (also the 
numbers) or care much (because the fees and potential profits incentivize him to put a lot of 
money to work fast).  They become part of the portfolio of a CDO, against which debt is issued. 
 A rating agency analyst assigns ratings to the CDO debt, about which he can’t know much (lack 
of specialized expertise; vast number of underlying assets; structural complexity and the newness 
2007 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.7All Rights Reserved

 A hedge fund manager buys CDO debt about whi
ch he doesn’t know much (with thousands of 
underlying mortgages having been sliced and diced) or worry much (given the high debt ratings). 
 
Concoctions like this are tolerated only in heady times. Clearly the results can be incendiary.  We’re 
waiting to see the final outcome – and perhaps to pick among the ashes. 
 
One last thought:  Let’s say slicing, dicing and selling onward do have the potential to reduce the 
overall level of risk in the system, all other things being equal.  Even if that were true, the other 
things wouldn’t remain equal; market participants would adjust their behavior to the new 
reality and in so doing return risk to its old level.  On May 23, the Financial Times said this about 
trying to reduce risk by selling onward and by obtaining credit insurance via derivatives: 
 
This makes banks less vulnerable to individual defaults. But it could also be making 
them feel so comfortable about lending risks that they are making more risky 
loans.  Outside investors such as hedge funds are gobbling them up, either because 
they also think they are protected with credit derivatives or because they are 
desperate to find somewhere to place their cash.  This has triggered a collapse in the 
standards used to conduct and fund deals.  (Emphasis added) 
 
Again, no matter how good fundamentals may be, humans exercising their greed and propensity to 
err have the ability to screw things up.  Perhaps Myron Scholes put it most succinctly (The Wall 
Street Journal, March 6): “My belief is that because the system is now more stable, we’ll make 
it less stable through more leverage, more risk taking.” 
 
 
UThe L Word 
 
Some of the most glaring innovation this time around has taken place in the area of leverage.  It’s not 
that leverage hasn’t been available and been used before:  In the late 1980s, companies like RJR were 
the subject of leveraged buyouts in which 95% of the purchase price was borrowed.  Nowadays, debt 
rarely constitutes much more than 80% of buyout capital structures, but the terms of the debt and the 
ease of obtaining it are startlingly accommodating.   
 
Unlike the historic norm, it’s routine today to issue CCC-rated bonds.  It’s easy to borrow money for 
the express purpose of distributing cash to equity holders, magnifying the company’s leverage.  It’s 
so easy to issue bonds with little or no creditor protection in the indenture that a label has been 
coined for them: “covenant-lite.”  And it’s possible to issue bonds whose interest payments can be 
paid in more bonds at the option of the borrower. 
 
The first requirement for an elevated opportunity in distressed debt is the unwise extension of 
credit, which I define as the making of loans which borrowers will be unable to service if things 
get a little worse.  This happens when lenders fail to require a sufficient margin of safety.   
 
Here the interrelatedness of cycles is quite evident.  Good economic times bring rising profits.  
Rising profits cause the default rate to subside.  And the low default experience erases lenders’ 
reticence.  Among other things, they become willing to lend money so that troubled companies can 
2007 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.8All Rights Reserved

stay afloat and hopefully outgrow their problems.  Today that’s called “rescue finance”; in less rosy 
times it might be called “throwing good money after bad.” 
 
The default rate in the high yield bond universe is at a 25-year low on a rolling-twelve-month 
basis.  Under such circumstances, how could the average supplier of capital be expected to 
maintain a high level of risk aversion and prudence, especially when doing so means ceding all 
the loan making to others?  It’s not for nothing that they say “The worst of loans are made in 
the best of times.” 
 
 
UThe Downside of Leverage  
 
If lenders are acting in an imprudent fashion, what’s the effect on the borrowing companies?  If loans 
are available too readily, is it right or wrong to borrow?  These are among the most interesting 
questions of the day. 
 
Lots of good things have been said about leverage.  In the late 1980s, when venerable American 
companies were being bought in leveraged buyouts structured with debt/equity ratios of 25-to-one, 
we were told that an underleveraged balance sheet is indicative of a sub-optimal capital structure and 
excessive use of high-cost equity, and that significant leverage sharpens management’s focus on cash 
flow and leads to better expense control.   
 
The only thing omitted was the reminder that equity – which doesn’t require the periodic payment of 
interest or the repayment of principal at maturity – represents a company’s margin of safety.  It’s the 
capital layer that absorbs the first blow in tough times without occasioning an event of default.  
While leverage may magnify gains in good times, it’s a healthy layer of equity that gets 
companies through the bad times.   
 
It’s inescapable that, all other things equal, greater leverage increases a company’s likelihood 
of experiencing financial distress.  Thus, with lenders enjoying a carefree recent experience and 
consequently financing some unwise deals – and with borrowers eager for the enhanced upside 
potential that comes with leverage – it seems clear that we’ll see rising rates of default and 
bankruptcy a few years down the pike.  This is especially true if, as has often been the case 
recently, debt is incurred not just to leverage the company’s equity, but to finance payouts to equity 
holders that reduce or eliminate the equity. 
 
So then, are private equity funds – raising much more equity capital than ever, and doing the biggest 
deals in history at a rapid-fire pace, at rising transaction prices and rising leverage ratios – doing a 
smart thing or making a mistake?  It all depends on how you look at things.  The funds seem to be 
looking in terms of optionality. 
 
 
UKetchup, Easy Money and Optionality  
 
I was a picky eater when I was a kid, but I loved ketchup, and my pickiness could be overcome with 
ketchup.  I would eat hamburgers, frankfurters, veal cutlets, filet of sole and frozen fish sticks, but as 
far as I was concerned, they were all just vehicles for ketchup.  The ketchup of today is easy 
borrowing, and private equity managers are entering into a large number of transactions to access it.   
 
2007 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.9All Rights Reserved

Let me illustrate what I consider to be the thought process:  If you were offered the chance to buy 
companies with 100% debt financing and no money of your own, how many would you buy?  The 
smart answer is, “All of them.”  Not just the well-run ones?  Or the growing ones?  Or the profitable 
ones?  No; all of them.  Some would produce positive cash flow and/or appreciation, which you’d 
welcome.  The others would be unsuccessful, but with none of your own money invested, you’d just 
walk away.  That’s optionality. 
 
Optionality is a new-age finance term for the ability to cheaply obtain a call on asset 
appreciation, creating the possibility of profits out of proportion to potential losses.  That’s the 
way it is in venture capital: all you can lose is your investment, but you can multiply it hundreds of 
times simply by finding the next Google.  Even though venture capital investing produces only 
occasional success, it’s justified by the occasional outsized payoff. 
 
I think that’s the deal today in mega-private equity.  In their highly successful first decade of 1975-
85, LBO funds invested in small, underpriced industrial concerns or orphaned corporate spinoffs.  
They paid low prices for stable companies, financed their purchases with moderate amounts of debt, 
and put a lot of energy into improving the companies’ operations.  Both their batting averages and 
their overall rates of return were attractive. 
 
But I’m not sure that’s the model today.  Few companies are languishing on the bargain counter, and 
everyone knows that if buyout funds bid for a company, the shareholders had better take a good look 
at what they’re giving up.  Likewise, buyout funds are buying well into a period of economic 
expansion, and the scope for improvement in operations may be limited.  
 
No, the model today seems different: pay premiums to open-market prices for prominent, multi-
billion dollar companies, sometimes after the boards, shareholders or other bidders have forced prices 
higher.  Borrow large sums to finance the deals.  Generate whatever fundamental improvement you 
can.  Hope the market will provide a highly leveraged payoff.  And, given the enormity of the scale, 
get rich off management fees, ancillary fees and the profits from the ones that work.   
 
In other words, it seems that, relative to the past, the thought process in mega-private equity is based 
on the combination of (1) ultra-cheap financing, (2) high fees, (3) quick withdrawal of equity capital 
and (4) a lower batting average but big payouts on the winners.  The optionality is certainly on the 
GPs’ side.  Let’s hope it works for the LPs as well. 
 
 
UIf the Lender’s a Sap, Is the Borrower a Genius? 
 
I have a lot of experience looking at leveraged transactions from the standpoint of the lender, but less 
experience as a borrower.  Thus I found it novel – even surprising – to read a January memo on this 
subject from Carlyle founder William Conway to his colleagues, with thoughts echoing mine: 
 
As you all know (I hope), the fabulous profits that we have been able to generate for 
our limited partners are not solely a function of our investment genius, but have 
resulted in large part from a great market and the availability of enormous amounts of 
cheap debt.  This cheap debt has been available for almost all maturities, most 
industries, infrastructure, real estate, and at all levels of the capital structure.  Frankly, 
there is so much liquidity in the world financial system, that lenders (even “our” 
lenders) are making very risky credit decisions. . . . 
2007 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.10All Rights Reserved

 
I know that this liquidity environment cannot go on forever.  I know that the longer it 
lasts the more money our investors (and we) will make.  I know that the longer it 
lasts, the greater the pressures will be on all of us to take advantage of this liquidity.  
And I know that the longer it lasts, the worse it will be when it ends.  And of course 
when it ends the buying opportunity will be a once in a lifetime chance.  But, I do not 
know when it will end. . . . 
 
Last year, I asked you to be humble, ethical and optimistic.  This year I am asking 
you to be careful as well. 
 
In 1990-91, our distressed debt funds made a fortune buying the obligations of companies that had 
been loaded up with too much debt in LBOs in the late ’80s.  Chastened by that experience, lenders 
in the ’90s didn’t provide enough leverage to make buyout companies much of a factor in the debt 
collapse of 2002.  But with the memory of having 1990-91 faded, leverage became freely available in 
the last few years, and thus we have little doubt we’ll be buying a great deal of distressed LBO debt 
the next time around. 
 
When all the above is taken together, it seems likely that a few years out, we’ll see a landscape 
littered with companies that were crippled with excessive debt loads and lenders who weren’t repaid.  
What happens to private equity funds and their investors will depend on the outcome of a game of 
hot potato: will they get their capital – and their gains – out of the over-leveraged companies before 
they go sour?  We’ll see. 
 
 
UBut Don’t the Borrowers Have a Free Pass? 
 
Much is being made of the possibility that today’s debt is default-proof.  “Toggle bonds” give 
borrowers the option of paying interest in the form of more bonds for a while.  And covenant-lite 
indentures mean the likelihood of an interim technical default has been reduced.  Do these 
developments reduce the overall risk? 
 
This, too, goes back to the concept of optionality.  The value of an option is greater the longer it has 
to run, and options that can’t be extinguished early are worth more than those that can. 
 
Think of someone who issues ten-year bonds to raise the money with which to buy a company.  On 
the surface, it seems he has ten years for his purchase to work out profitably, at the end of which 
period he has to repay his lenders.  In other words, he has a ten-year option on the company’s 
appreciation potential.  But what if the company gets in a bind in the early years and misses an 
interest payment?  Or if an economic slowdown causes a technical breach of a covenant?  In past 
downturns, these things have forced borrowers to pay lenders for extensions or forbearance, and they 
have led to defaults.  Those things may be somewhat less likely nowadays. 
 
It is true that payment-in-kind and covenant-lite loans reduce the likelihood of interim defaults.  But 
does that mean the credit landscape is risk-free and lenders can breathe easy?  Sooner or later, debt 
has to be repaid or refinanced, and the credit market may not be accommodating at that moment; this 
is especially true if the company’s fortunes have deteriorated.  Not enough of a company’s debt may 
be default-proof to make it invulnerable.  The price of the debt may decline with the fundamentals, 
2007 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.11All Rights Reserved

even if default isn’t an immediate threat.  And the free pass in the interim may just delay – but also 
worsen – the eventual outcome.   
 
Under a traditional structure, a company might default in the third year of a bond’s life, by which 
time 20% of its value may have evaporated.  But with these new wrinkles, it might not happen until 
year five . . . when 60% of the value is gone.  Yes, lenders are giving borrowers more rope.  But 
will it prove to be a lifeline for the company or a hangman’s noose?  A lot will depend on how 
things go while the postponed default is in abeyance. 
 
This is yet another area where up-cycle faith that risk has been reduced can convince people to add 
back the risk.  As The Wall Street Journal said of standby revolvers on May 11, “Thanks to debt 
arrangements like this, some private-equity buyers say they are doing deals they would otherwise not 
do.” 
 
 
UWhat Could Cause This Upward Cycle to Falter? 
 
Since I insist that the good times can’t roll on forever, I’m often asked what might make them stop.  I 
don’t have any inside information on this subject, but I can enumerate the possibilities: 
 
1. economic slowdown, 
2. reduced willingness to lend or insistence on higher interest rates, perhaps due to increased 
worry about credit risk, 
3. systemic problems like a crisis in derivatives or a cluster of hedge fund meltdowns, 
4. exogenous factors such as $100 oil, a dollar crisis, terrorist acts, and 
5. the things I haven’t thought of. 
 
First, I want to point out that these things are not unrelated.  A reduction in lenders’ willingness to 
lend may stem from an economic slowdown.  An economic slowdown could be brought on by an 
exogenous event.  It’s when there’s a confluence of these things that the debt market gets into real 
trouble, as was the case in 1990 and 2002. 
 
Second, these things are often unpredictable.  I like to remind people that the best buying opportunity 
we ever had in distressed debt arose in the summer of 2002, when recession, credit crunch, 9/11, 
Afghanistan, telecom meltdown and the scandals at Enron et al. occurred all at once.  Few if any of 
these were predictable twelve months earlier. 
 
And third, the one we should worry about most is number five.  Investors can cope with the things 
they can anticipate, analyze and discount.  They have more trouble with the rest.  I love hearing 
people from the “I know” school say, “I’m not anticipating any surprises.”  Those are the 
developments that can knock a market into a cocked hat.  As Martin Wolf wrote in the Financial 
Times on May 2, “The most obvious reason for taking today’s euphoria with a barrel of salt is that 
nobody ever expects shocks.  That is what makes them shocks.”  
 
Where do we stand in the cycle?  In my opinion, there’s little mystery.  I see low levels of 
skepticism, fear and risk aversion.  Most people are willing to undertake risky investments, often 
because the promised returns from traditional, safe investments seem so meager.  This is true even 
though the lack of interest in safe investments and the acceptance of risky investments have rendered 
2007 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.12All Rights Reserved

the slope of the risk/return line quite flat.  Risk premiums are generally the skimpiest I’ve ever seen, 
but few people are responding by refusing to accept incremental risk. 
 
Peter Bernstein put it this way in the February 15 issue of Economics and Portfolio Strategy:   
 
I hear over and over that we live in an era of low expected returns.  The rational 
response to low expected returns is to withdraw and wait until expected returns are 
higher.  That response to low expected returns appears to have gone out of fashion.  
Today’s response is to seek higher returns from higher risks in a low-risk 
environment – or, worse, to underestimate the risks taken.  [Of course, I am less 
certain than Peter that we are in a low-risk environment.] 
 
Markets have tended recently to move up on positive developments and to recover easily from 
negatives.  I see few assets that people are eager to get rid of, and few forced sellers; instead, most 
assets are strongly bid for.  As a result, I’m not aware of any broad markets that I would describe as 
under-priced or uncrowded.  I will say, however, that some of the excess confidence that usually 
accompanies booms may be missing.  Some of the people making risky investments today seem to be 
doing so with their fingers crossed.  And even though they’re optimistic enough to make these 
prosperity-oriented investments, they’re also wary enough to want to hedge their bets by 
participating in distressed debt as well. 
 
It is what it is.  We’ve been living in optimistic times.  The cycle has been swinging strongly 
upward.  Prices are elevated and risk premiums are slender.  Trust has replaced skepticism, 
and eagerness has replaced reticence.  Do you agree or disagree?  That’s the key question.  
Answer it first, and the implications for investing become clear.   
 
In the first quarter of this year, significant delinquencies occurred in subprime mortgages.  Those 
directly involved lost a lot of money, and onlookers worried about contagion to other parts of the 
economy and other markets.  In the second quarter, the impact reached CDOs that had invested in 
subprime mortgage portfolios and hedge funds that had bought CDO debt, including two Bear 
Stearns funds.  Those who had to liquidate assets were forced – as usual – to sell what they could 
sell, not what they wanted to sell, and not just the offending subprime-linked assets.  We began to 
read about ratings downgrades, margin calls and fire-sales, the usual fuel for capital market 
meltdowns.  And in the last few weeks we’ve begun to see investor reticence on the rise, with new 
low-grade debt issues repriced, postponed or pulled, leaving bridge loans un-refinanced. 
 
It is in this way that awareness of the inevitability of cycles is reawakened, and it is for reasons 
like these that the pendulum starts to swing back from one extreme toward the center of its arc 
. . . and then the other extreme.  We never know whether a little jiggle is the start of the swing 
back and, if so, how far it will go.  But we always should be aware that reversion will occur. 
 
The last 4½ years have been carefree, halcyon times for investors.  That doesn’t mean it’ll stay that 
way.  I’ll give Warren Buffett the last word, as I often do:  “It’s only when the tide goes out that you 
find out who’s been swimming naked.”  Pollyannas take note: the tide cannot come in forever.  
Time, tide and cycles wait for no man. 
 
 
July 16, 2007 
2007 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.13All Rights Reserved

Memo to: Oaktree Clients  
From: Howar
d Marks  
Re: It’
s All Good . . . Really? 
As I worked on “It’s All Good” during my vacation in late June – and even when I issued 
it two weeks ago – I had no reason to believe that the universally upward cycle about 
which I was writing could be curtailed before the end of July.  But the good times 
certainly have stopped rolling in many areas, at least for now.  I think it’s extremely 
important to study the way this has happened, as it provides a highly instructive object 
lesson. 
It’s folly to think we know
 in advance just what it is that will cause the market 
pendulum to stop swinging in one direction and start in the other, but it’s even 
greater folly to think that nothing of that nature will happen.  That’s my twist on one 
of my favorite quotes, from behaviorist Amos Tversky: 
It’s frightening to think that you might not know som
ething, but more 
frightening to think that, by and large, the world is run by people who 
have faith that they know exactly what’s going on. 
My friend Bruce Newberg thinks a quote attributed to Mark Twain says it best, and he 
may be right: 
It ain't what you don't know that gets you into trouble. It's what you know 
for sure that just ain't so. 
Over the last few years, some people went around saying, “We don’t know what bad 
thing will happen, but something will,” and others said, “We’re confident that 
nothing bad will happen.”  Now, as is often the case, unassuming caution seems to 
be winning out over cocksure optimism. 
UThe Seed 
This memo isn’t about the events of July 2007, but rather how recent events exemplify 
the time-honored pattern that kicks off the swing back of the pendulum.  That pattern 
often begins with a single seed, and sometimes one that’s hard to identify.  That difficulty 
isn’t there this time; it’s just that the seed seems so small compared with the 
repercussions. 
The seed of the current cyclical downturn sprouted in the area of subprime mortgages, 
residential loans made to homeowners with less-than-stellar creditworthiness.  The mere 
2007 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.All Rights Reserved

making of those loans didn’t create the problem.  Rather, it’s the fact that both borrowing 
and lending decisions were quite poor and in many cases misguided. 
 
As I described in “It’s All Good,” loan originators and mortgage brokers were 
incentivized by fees to generate loan volume and often were able to do so without having 
to risk their own capital.  They were paid to produce quantity, not quality, and – surprise! 
– they did.  Capital providers’ lack of concern regarding creditworthiness enabled 
borrowers to borrow more than they could repay and more than was justified under 
prudent lending standards . . . at adjustable rates even if the borrowers couldn’t withstand 
an upward adjustment . . . often supported by inadequate documentation regarding 
incomes and assets.   Deficiencies in due diligence even permitted numerous cases of 
mortgage fraud, where borrowers bought houses, marked them up through sales to related 
parties, and then borrowed against them in amounts far in excess of their actual value 
(and their cost).   
 
It’s not surprising that these circumstances combined to produce a high volume of 
deficient loans.  In fact, it would be amazing if they hadn’t.  Who could have looked at 
this system without expecting this outcome? 
 
Okay – bad loans were made, and delinquencies and foreclosures have been rising among 
the weakest of mortgage borrowers.  How can these isolated developments have jumped 
the rails to affect commercial real estate?  How could they possibly have led to difficulty 
for the private equity industry, which does no mortgage lending?  And how can these 
specific linkages have been generalized into widespread repercussions on the economy 
and the credit and equity markets? 
 
 
UContagion 
 
Among the many cyclical phenomena that recur regularly, one of the most 
interesting is the attitude toward contagion.  When the environment is rosy and 
market participants are optimistic, negative developments are described as “isolated 
incidents.”  Market participants find it easy to maintain their equilibrium, and the 
possibility of repercussions is easily dismissed.  This is no more realistic than what 
we see at the pessimistic end of the pendulum’s swing, where negatives are 
generalized into epidemics, contagion is overstated and participants totally lose their 
cool. 
 
Early in June, I met with Marty Fridson of FridsonVision.  Marty is a longtime friend and 
one of the deans of the high yield bond business – by any standard an expert on credit.  In 
his discussion of the subprime crisis, Marty referenced a complex flowchart labeled 
“Possible Paths to Contagion.”  It showed a number of ways in which the subprime 
problem could affect high yield bonds.  Linkages like these can be foreseen if you’re 
thoughtful and willing to look ahead.  Marty focused on contagion to high yield bonds, 
but I’ll discuss below how this small problem has spread far more broadly. 
2007 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.2All Rights Reserved

UAnimal, Vegetable or Mineral? 
 
These were the categories into which things fell on the old TV quiz show “Twenty 
Questions,” and they were always the subject of the panelists’ first question.  In the case 
of the subprime crisis, the factors contributing to contagion can be sorted into three other 
categories: fundamental, psychological and technical.  Here are some examples: 
 
Fundamental influences are those with tangible consequences for business.  When 
mortgage delinquencies rise sharply, first there are the obvious direct effects: 
 
 Lenders lose money, and some go bankrupt.  
 Real estate brokers’ commissions dry up. 
 Homebuilders see less demand for their product. 
 Building materials companies see lower volumes. 
 
Then there are the second-order consequences, or what the British would call the “knock-
on effects”:   
 
 Home prices fall.  Mortgages based on the old, high prices cannot be refinanced, and 
simple economics makes it smarter to default rather than service a $500,000 mortgage 
on what is now a $400,000 house.  Thus delinquencies rise further. 
 Lower home prices at the bottom of the ladder ripple through other sectors of the 
housing market. 
 All consumers feel poorer due to the negative wealth effect and curtail their 
expenditures, crimping revenues at retailers and then manufacturers. 
 Borrowing declines, depressing the level of business at financial institutions. 
 
All of these things have direct consequences for the economy and the markets – from just 
the little seed of bad subprime loans.  But there will also be extensive psychological 
repercussions: 
 
 Losses that are experienced – or even just imagined – cause investors and providers 
of capital to realize they’ve been overstating positives and understating negatives. 
 Their confidence ebbs and they start to worry.  Thus they make less capital available 
for risky investments, or they charge more for the capital they will provide. 
 Thus risk premiums and expected returns must rise if investors are to be induced to 
make further risk-bearing investments.  One way this happens is through higher 
interest rates – depressing consumer and business activity. 
 Another way prospective returns are raised is through price declines for existing 
assets, and these can course through many markets.   
 
Finally, the environment is altered by technical factors that influence the supply/demand 
balance for capital and assets. 
 
 As capital dries up, deals become less attractive (because the cost of capital is higher) 
and maybe downright impossible to execute (because capital is unavailable). 
2007 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.3All Rights Reserved

 If portfolio holdings have to be sold to reduce leverage or raise cash to meet actual or 
feared withdrawals, th
is has a depressant effect on asset prices that reinforces the 
cycle.   
 Lower asset prices may lead to margin calls, and thus possibly to fire sales. 
 Forced sellers sell what they can sell, not necessarily what they want to sell.  As a 
result, the prices of assets that are entirely unrelated to the fundamental problem can 
join the downward spiral.  It’s for this reason that they say, “In times of crisis, all 
correlations go to one.” 
 
Every one of the above factors has been seen in the last few weeks – all growing from 
just the subprime seed.  The economy is still showing good strength overall and most 
companies are doing fine; the default rate among high yield bonds continues to run 
at 25-year lows.  But strong fundamentals mean little if technical factors combine 
with a fundamental problem to profoundly depress investor psychology. 
 
It’s important to remember the extent to which these factors interrelate.  Fundamentals 
influence psychology, which determines technicals, which feed back to further affect 
fundamentals.  Just as these things can create a virtuous circle on the upside – such 
as the one that has prevailed since late-2002 – they’re now behind the apparent start 
of a vicious circle on the downside. 
 
 
UThe L Word Revisited 
 
Most explanations of the financial dynamism of the last few years have centered on 
something called “excess liquidity.”  Vast amounts of liquidity in the hands of investors, 
it’s been said, caused them to avidly pursue investments, neglect due diligence, accept 
low prospective returns, and therefore bid up asset prices. 
 
But where does excess liquidity come from?  Not from more currency.  The amount of 
currency in the world is somewhat fixed, and each person’s receipt is another person’s 
expenditure.  The fact that China has massive reserves to invest merely means those sums 
came out of someone else’s account. 
 
I think the “L word” that should be focused on isn’t liquidity, but leverage.  This is 
the one I discussed in “It’s All Good,” and the element behind many of the excesses of 
late.  High levels of lending and borrowing relative to capital balances can increase buying 
power and fire up economies and markets.  The question is whether that expansion will be 
maintained and increased.  If not, this source of growth will peter out . . . as has been the 
case in the last few weeks. 
 
A decade or so back, the ability of parties other than the Fed to increase the leverage in 
the system was limited.  Margin debt for purchases of stock couldn’t exceed 100% of an 
investor’s equity, and bank loans likewise were restricted to a multiple of capital.  But in 
recent years, some new factors have meaningfully changed the picture, including 
derivatives, hedge funds and non-bank lending.  All three of these – among which there is 
2007 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.4All Rights Reserved

significant overlap – have negated the old limits and made vast amounts of leverage 
available to investors and asset buyers. 
 
This leveraging up w
as the greatest single element in the asset surge of the last few 
years.  In fact, the breadth of the gains tells me we didn’t have an “asset bubble,” 
but rather a “leverage bubble.”  As Jeremy Grantham points out in his latest letter, 
leveraged loans (so-called “bank loans” often funded by hedge funds rather than banks) 
are a good candidate for the “bubble” label, as their volume in the first half of 2007, at 
$545 billion, was up 60% over the same period in 2006, which showed a similarly 
dramatic increase over 2005.  Leverage (along with the lowered standards that resulted 
from eagerness to put borrowed capital to work) was the common thread in much of the 
appreciation that took place across asset classes and regions. 
 
Now we’re having a chance to see – once again – that the process works in both 
directions.  And as so often is the case, the air tends to come out of the balloon far 
faster (and more violently) than it went in.  The process is mesmerizing – like 
watching a train wreck happen. 
 
 
UThe Engine of Growth Seizes Up 
 
The pervasiveness of leverage throughout the financial system means the slowing process 
comes in many forms and takes many twists and turns.  It’s not possible – or necessary – 
to enumerate all of them.  All we need are a couple of examples.  For these we’ll take a 
look at collateralized debt obligations, or CDOs.   
 
For a simple example, consider commercial mortgage-backed securities, or CMBS.  Over 
the last few months, Bruce Karsh has pointed out that prices for CMBS were falling even 
though the business of being a landlord was good and prices of buildings were increasing.   
 
His explanation has been that many CDOs held both subprime paper and the riskier 
tranches of CMBS.  Because of the developments in the subprime area, (1) they were 
affected by psychological contagion, (2) new ones couldn’t be formed, meaning CDOs 
ceased to be buyers of new CMBS, and (3) some faced the need to reduce their leverage 
and raise cash.  Unable to sell subprime assets (or not wishing to recognize losses if they 
could be deferred), they’ve been selling CMBS, putting downward pressure on prices.  
That’s how problems in one asset class can depress prices in another. 
 
Now let’s look a little deeper.  Bear in mind that CDO managers are paid to (1) issue debt 
in tranches that vary in terms of seniority and promised return and (2) use the proceeds to 
assemble portfolios of debt instruments.  Borrow and buy, borrow and buy.  A CDO 
manager’s compensation increases in proportion to the amounts involved and is locked in 
for the term of the CDO.  Thus CDO managers, like mortgage brokers, were motivated to 
play a major part in what I described in “The Race to the Bottom” in February: “a 
market where a desire for quantity and speed has taken over from an insistence on 
2007 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.5All Rights Reserved

quality and caution.”  Not all managers succumbed to this temptation, of course, but it 
was there.   
 
CDOs have been among the greatest contributors to the recent upswi
ng.  To a large 
extent they were a bottomless pit that could never be filled, a prime source of 
demand for debt.  Why was their growth so strong?  Because they offered a terrific deal, 
attracting vast quantities of money that had to be invested.  What was that deal?  Simple: 
high-rated debt at low-grade yields. 
 
Too good to be true?  Of course.  The ratings were too high because rating agency 
analysts had to rate exotic structured products with which they had no experience (and 
probably no true understanding).  And I’m confident the CDO managers were very 
persuasive, using sophisticated statistical models to explain how safe they were thanks to 
portfolio diversification and over-collateralization.  For this reason, many tranches of 
CDOs stuffed with non-investment grade debt received investment grade ratings, looked 
cheap based on their attractive promised yields, and thus sold out rapidly.   
 
CDOs were among the greatest buyers of residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBS) 
and non-investment grade leveraged loans.  I’ll bet some investors even leveraged up to 
buy the debt of these highly leveraged entities, which in turn used their capital to buy 
highly leveraged paper.  Could the end be in doubt?  This mode of response to the low-
return environment of the last few years was doomed to end badly. 
 
Now the fallacies in this approach have been exposed, with widespread ramifications: 
 
 Because the ability to create new CDOs may be greatly curtailed, they’re unlikely to 
represent much of a source of demand for new leveraged loans. 
 In that case, future buyouts dependent on leveraged loan issuance won’t be funded as 
readily. 
 Billions in bridge loans that investment banks extended for buyouts appear to be 
“hung” because of the difficulty in refinancing them through sales to investors. 
 The investment banks behind the loans are likely to encounter substantial losses as 
they’re marked down to make them salable. 
 Outstanding high yield bonds and leveraged loans will have to decline in price (and 
rise in yield) to make them competitive with this marked-down buyout paper. 
 Debt that has been inventoried to facilitate the formation of new CDOs may have to 
be dumped at losses now that the CDO creation process has shrunk. 
 Investment banks that made bridge loans and amassed inventories for non-existent 
CDOs may be unwilling to extend new financing from their balance sheets. 
 Fewer buyouts will be able to be financed as long as the debt markets remain in this 
condition. 
 Thus the “LBO put” may no longer be a force in the stock market, in which case 
investors will no longer be able to count on buyout funds to purchase companies at 
premium prices. 
 
2007 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.6All Rights Reserved

How did the increase in subprime mortgage delinquencies lead to last week’s 580 point 
drop in the Dow?  These are some of the ways.  Fault lines run through portfolios, 
markets and economies, and usually they are exposed only in times of
 crisis.  The 
fault line this time came in the form of pervasive leverage. 
 
 
UThe Role of Psychology 
 
At the end of each day, Oaktree’s debt trading desk sends out an email recapping our 
buys and sells, along with market developments and the day’s biggest headlines.  On July 
26, (the day the Dow declined 312 points), one of the headlines read “Paulson Says 
Subprime-Mortgage Collapse Doesn’t Threaten Economic Growth.”   
 
On the simplest level, there’s every reason to understand that the failure to make monthly 
payments on the part of a bunch of mortgage borrowers at the bottom of the credit ladder 
won’t have direct effects far beyond their local communities and the holders of their 
loans.  But (1) the government usually does a poor job of anticipating second-order 
consequences and (2) politicians have every incentive to act as cheerleaders for the 
economy and downplay the negatives.  Unlike distressed debt investors and other bargain 
hunters, no officeholder wants to see economic weakness, since it tends not to do much 
for re-electability.   
 
Even leaving aside this factor, the issue here comes down to the difference between the 
direct workings of the “real” economy and the follow-on effects of psychology.  I believe 
the latter are profound and have the ability to overwhelm the former.  In fact, I 
sometimes think there’s little to the economy other than psychology – and thus that 
the real economy simply can’t be distinguished from the psychological one.   
 
 If consumers feel insecure about their economic future, they won’t buy.   
 If they don’t expect consumers to buy, manufacturers of consumer goods will cut 
back production, and they certainly won’t produce to build inventories.  Instead 
they’ll downsize by laying off workers, further adding to consumer woes.   
 Pessimistic consumer goods manufacturers won’t invest in plant expansion, so 
construction companies and manufacturers of production equipment will suffer as 
well.   
 All of this will be exacerbated by the reduced willingness of worried lenders to 
provide debt capital, or at least their insistence on higher interest rates to cover the 
increased risks.   
 At the extreme, government tax revenues might decline, necessitating restrictive tax 
increases or the troubling growth of deficits.   
 
It’s all a matter of expectations.  So when someone says, “psychological influences aside, 
I don’t think there’ll be much of an impact,” I wouldn’t give that statement much weight.  
It’s entirely understandable that, despite favorable fundamentals, newly chastened 
investors have pulled back into their shells, largely because of the profound effect of a 
downturn in psychology. 
2007 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.7All Rights Reserved

*     *     * 
 
    
In the last few weeks, investors have learned some painful lessons.  They went from 
feeling they understood exactly what was going on to realizing they merely had been 
carried along in a rosy environment.  They learned (1) that they hadn’t accurately gauged 
the risks they were taking when they invested in innovative and highly leveraged 
structured entities, (2) that the rating agencies they’d relied on didn’t know either, and (3) 
that in understating risk they hadn’t dem
anded enough of a risk premium or sufficient 
protective covenants.  They learned the hard way that leverage magnifies losses as well 
as gains.  And they learned that negative developments in a far-off corner of the economy 
can affect them profoundly.  There’s absolutely nothing new in any of this. 
 
In just the last two weeks, we’ve seen headlines such as these: 
 
 Subprime Uncertainty Fans Out 
 Bear Stearns Tells Investors Funds Worthless 
 Crisis Forces Banks to Make Hobson’s Choice 
 Banks Delay Sale of Chrysler Debt As Market Stalls 
 Chrysler, Boots Financing Woes Dim “Golden Era” for Leveraged Buyout Firms 
 A Second Day of Declines Caps the Worst Wall Street Week in Years 
 Credit Crunch May Derail Buyout Boom; LBOver 
 Fears Intensify on Economy, Despite Growth 
 Hedge Fund Deleveraging Could Be Next Big Worry 
 
What these developments mean for the future – and how far this swing toward negative 
events and negative psychology will go – is absolutely unknowable.  Is this just a bump 
in the road, like the Asia-related declines that rippled through markets in the second 
quarter of 2006 and the first quarter of 2007, from which the recovery was swift?  Or are 
these events the first steps toward a major credit crunch that will bring on a recession?  
No one knows, including us. 
 
But what we do know is that the bull-market excesses I decried in my memo of two 
weeks ago (and in “The New Paradigm” in October and “The Race to the Bottom” in 
February) have reversed for the moment, with profound effects on asset prices.  Just as 
risky companies could obtain ridiculously cheap and easy financing a month ago, 
now the debt of perfectly good companies is providing generous promised returns 
and sometimes is unsalable.  Oaktree bottom fishers who’ve felt like they’ve been 
cooling their heels for the last few years are smiling for a change. 
 
And mindfulness of cycles is on the way to being restored.  When things can’t get 
better – as some buyout GPs pointed out earlier this year – they won’t.  When the 
pendulum reaches the extreme of its arc, it will swing back.  When markets are 
priced for perfection, they will disappoint.   And when investors demand inadequate 
compensation for bearing risk, they will learn the error of their ways.  With the 
word “eventually” implicit in these statements, I’m 100% sure they’re all correct. 
2007 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.8All Rights Reserved

 
I can’t say, “This is it,” but I am willing to say, “This is more like it.”  It’ll always go 
this way.  Investors should learn that simple lesson.  But most never will.  That’s 
what the philosopher Santayana had in mind when he said, “Those who cannot remember 
the past are condemned to repeat it.” 
 
 
July 30, 2007 
2007 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.9All Rights Reserved