Memo to: Oaktree Clients 
From:    Howard  Marks  
Re: Will It Work? 
The other day, my son Andrew – college senior and credit-analyst-to-be – asked whether 
I think Treasury Secretary Geithner is doing the right things.  As has happened before, his 
question elicited a fatherly response that grew into this memo. 
When you want a bridge built, you hire a civil engineer whose “calcs” will determine 
exactly how much concrete and steel should be used.  Then it’ll be sure to hold the 
weight of the cars you expect to cross it.  And if you have to perform a task in carpentry, 
you can employ specialized tools developed and tested expressly for the job: esoteric 
things like miter boxes, routers and extractors.   
One of the most important things to bear in mind today is that economics isn’t an exact 
science.  It may not even be much of a science at all, in the sense that in science, 
controlled experiments can be conducted, past results can be replicated with confidence, 
and cause-and-effect relationships can be depended on to hold.  It’s not for nothing that 
economics is called “the dismal science.”   
Solutions in economics aren’t nearly as dependable as engineers’ calculations, and there 
may not be a tool that’s just right for fixing an economy.  Of course, the toolbox offers 
lots of possibilities, including interest rate reductions; quantitative easing; tax cuts, 
rebates and credits; stimulus checks; infrastructure spending; capital injections; loans, 
rescues and takeovers; regulatory forebearances and on and on.  But no one should 
think there’s a “golden tool,” such that solving the problem is just a matter of 
figuring out which one it is and applying it.  Anyone who holds the problem solvers to 
that standard is being unfair and unrealistic.  There are a number of reasons why, 
including these: 
Every situation is different, and none is exactly like any that has come before.  That
means fixed recipes can’t work.  Certainly this one has never been seen before.
Most policy actions aren’t all good or all bad.  They merely represent imperfect
compromises as to ideology, goals, problem solving and resource allocation.
Economic problems are multi-faceted, meaning the solution for one aspect might not
work on – and in fact might exacerbate – another aspect.
Economies are dynamic, and the problems are moving targets.  The environment
changes constantly, rather than sitting still and waiting for a solution to work.
The main ingredient in economics is psychology, and the workings of psychology
clearly can’t be fully known, controlled or fixed.
2009 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.All Rights Reserved

Here’s how Thomas Friedman put it in The New York Times of January 31: 
Everyone is looking for the guy – the guy who can tell you exactly what 
ails the world’s financial system, exactly how we get out of this mess and 
exactly what you should be doing to protect your savings. . . .  But here’s 
what’s really scary:  the guy isn’t here.  He’s left the building. . . . 
There is no magic bullet for this economic crisis, no magic bailout 
package, no magic stimulus.  We have woven such a tangled financial 
mess with subprime mortgages wrapped in complex bonds and 
derivatives, pumped up with leverage, and then globalized to the far 
corners of the earth that, much as we want to think this will soon be over, 
that is highly unlikely. 
The “I know” school (which first appeared in a memo in 2001) is still making 
predictions.  Statistical comparisons are being made to past recessions and solutions 
extrapolated from those experiences.  Thus it’s the consensus of this school that the 
recovery will start during the first quarter of 2010.  I also see people projecting a stock 
market rebound based on the average time between past declines and the recoveries 
therefrom. 
I think it’s a mistake to hold confident opinions about the events of today.  Instead, I 
think this is a great time to reaffirm faith in the “I don’t know” school, of which I’m a 
card-carrying member.  No one should feel certain they know what’s going to unfold, or 
when.  The only things we have to fall back on at this juncture are intrinsic value, 
company survival and our own staying power as investors.  Of course, even these 
things mean we have to make judgments about what the future is likely to look like.  
That requirement, in turn, means nothing can be approached with complete safety 
or certainty.  Nevertheless, we can take action if we think those three elements will 
be present under most circumstances.  That’s the right mindset for today. 
Harder Than Sudoku
 
The impossibility of reaching into the economic toolbox for that one perfect tool is easily 
illustrated with a list of some of the challenges present today.  For a learning exercise, 
skip today’s Sudoku or crossword puzzle and take a crack at resolving these dilemmas: 
Consumer confidence and spending are weak.  We want to stimulate, but we don’t
want to replace weakness with hyperinflation.
We’re willing to drop fiscal discipline in favor of stimulus through deficit spending,
but we don’t want to scare away offshore investors from the Treasury securities we’ll
issue to fund our deficits.
We’re willing to distribute stimulus checks, but we seem unable to make frightened
individuals spend the money rather than save it.
In fact, we know consumers got into trouble by spending more than they earned, and
2009 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.2All Rights Reserved

now they should build some savings.  But whereas in the recent past consumer 
spending grew faster than incomes, a rising savings rate means spending would grow 
slower than incomes, just at a time when incomes are falling and spending is needed.   
Likewise, with tax revenues down, states and cities have to balance their budgets.
One way to do so is to raise income tax and sales tax rates, but this will further
depress local economies and increase the burden on their beleaguered citizens.
We want to recapitalize the banks, but we don’t want to reward past mistakes.
We’re thinking about buying the banks’ “toxic” assets.  But if we pay above-market
prices, that’s a subsidy to the reckless (see above), and if we pay market or below-
market prices, that will further erode bank capital through write-downs.
We know suspending mark-to-market accounting would end write-downs, but doing
so might also reduce confidence in balance sheets and postpone the day of reckoning
needed for our financial institutions to reach bottom and recover.
We want the banks to lend, but we can’t – and shouldn’t – make them extend loans to
non-creditworthy borrowers.
We want to reduce the incidence of home foreclosure, but we don’t want to reward
people who speculated by buying multiple homes or lied on mortgage applications.
And we’d rather not treat people who bought more house than they could afford
better than those who acted prudently.
We want to make mortgage relief available to those who are unable to service their
mortgages, but we don’t want to give people incentives to stop making payments.
We’re considering letting bankruptcy judges reset mortgage contracts, but we don’t
want to tell lenders that loan contracts are no longer sacrosanct, which certainly
would deter them from making new loans.
We don’t want the depressant impact of auto companies going bankrupt and suppliers
and dealers following suit.  But we also don’t want to pump money into the industry
unless we’re confident it can produce good cars at competitive prices.
We want to see the auto industry “rationalized,” but that means seeing people lose
their jobs or have their paychecks reduced, which would spread pain, put stress on
benefit funds, and cut into GDP.
We want taxpayer-supported automakers to use American steel, but (assuming it’s
more expensive than imported steel) that will either (a) raise car prices, making cars
more expensive for hard-pressed buyers and making the Big 3 less competitive, or (b)
require the companies to eat the difference, making it harder for them to achieve
profitability.
We want to curb speculation in derivatives, but we don’t want to make it harder for
businesses, farmers, insurers and investors to legitimately hedge risk.
In fact, we want to prevent excesses on the part of business, but most people don’t
think it’s a good idea to nationalize companies or have the government tell them how
to operate.
It’s abundantly clear from this list – and it’s only a partial list – that solving the 
current problem will require compromises and a combination of dis
parate elements.  
Some will work, while others will fail and have to be replaced.  And some will work 
with regard to one facet of the problem but aggravate another.  Lastly, no one 
should think that even a wise combination will produce quick results.  
2009 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.3All Rights Reserved

Regulating Excess Compensation 
Some of the excesses the government wants to stop are in the area of compensation at 
rescued banks.  Excessive compensation seems to have a lot in common with hard-core 
pornography: As Potter Stewart, Associate Justice of the United States Supreme Court, 
wrote about the latter, it’s hard to define but “I know it when I see it.” 
It’s easy to react adversely when an institution that lost billions and needed a taxpayer 
bailout is seen paying millions or billions in executive bonuses.  But how do we define 
excessive compensation, and what should be done about it?  More importantly, how do 
we make sure the cure won’t be worse than the disease? 
On February 14, The Wall Street Journal reported that, 
The giant stimulus package that cleared Congress Friday includes a last-
minute addition that restricts bonuses for top earners at firms receiving 
federal cash . . .  The most stringent pay restriction bars any company 
receiving funds from paying top earners bonuses equal to more than one-
third of their total annual compensation. 
Some limitation on compensation at taxpayer-supported institutions seems reasonable 
and unavoidable.  But is this provision a good thing?  Here are some of the problems: 
It doesn’t limit compensation, just bonuses.
Bonuses – especially if tied to achievements – should be preferable to high
salaries from the point of view of shareholders and taxpayers.  In fact, it was just
a few years ago that federal legislation created a preference for incentive
compensation tied to benchmarks.
An executive with a $1 million salary is in compliance with this restriction if he
receives a bonus of $500,000.  But one who’s paid $250,000 is in violation if he
receives a bonus of $200,000.  Should the taxpayer prefer the former to the latter?
Past challenges, like mobilizing industry for World War II, were met by recruiting
“dollar-a-year” leaders.  One hope here might be that able businesspeople will
come forward to work for nothing but a big success fee.  Citigroup CEO Vikram
Pandit is receiving a salary of $1.  Should we really limit his bonus to 50 cents?
The new law will limit bonuses at taxpayer-assisted banks, not all banks.  Will
that doom the rescued banks to second-rate management?  And thus second-rate
profitability?  Is that desirable?
Bank managements and boards may want to avoid this limitation, and to do that
they may turn down or rush to repay federal money.  Doing so may reduce the
banks’ capital, weakening them and inhibiting their ability to lend.
Even the biggest losers among the banks had some profitable units and excellent
managers.  Do we want the weak institutions to lose these to their stronger peers
because they can’t pay competitively?
Does the fact that some bank managers made grave mistakes in recent years
mean no bank executives can be deserving of high compensation?  Does the
2009 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.4All Rights Reserved

government really want to stigmatize the field of banking and chase able 
executives from it to in
dustries where compensation is unregulated? 
The last time I saw legislation with near-unanimous appeal on a corporate-behavior
issue was in 2002, after the Enron scandal.  American business is still suffering from
some of Sarbanes-Oxley’s less-well-conceived provisions.
Observers are disappointed when recovery plans aren’t announced quickly or in detail.  
Yet here’s a provision that was inserted quickly and in detail, and it doesn’t do a lot to 
advance the ball.  Bottom line: a quick fix will prove hard to come by. 
Who’s Right? 
My mother used to tell a story about the shtetls – villages – in the old country where 
disagreements were settled by the rabbi.  In one, an argument was raging with no possible 
grounds for compromise.  The villagers brought the two parties to the rabbi.  “Tell your 
side,” the rabbi said to one fellow, and he did.  “You’re right,” the rabbi declared.   
One of the bystanders piped up: “You can’t tell him he’s right, rabbi; you haven’t heard 
the other side of the story.”  So the rabbi told the other party to tell his side, and he did.  
His story was the polar opposite of the other party’s.  “You’re right,” said the rabbi.   
“Hold on, rabbi,” a villager said, “the first guy told his story and you said he was right.  
Then the other guy told his story – different in every regard – and you said he was right.  
They both can’t be right.”  “And you’re right,” said the rabbi. 
The current disagreement over bank nationalization shows that (a) there can be valid 
arguments on both sides of an issue and (b) it can be hard to figure out who’s right.  Here 
are a few of the pros and cons as advanced by The Wall Street Journal on February 24: 
What are the pluses to nationalizing firms? 
Some banks are bleeding slowly toward insolvency.  Nationalizing them 
promptly would allow the government to wipe out the most toxic assets, 
reorganize what is left and sell the remains to private investors.  On a 
broader front, nationalization could help heal the banking system and 
encourage the remaining firms to boost lending. 
What are the minuses? 
Investors in the nationalized bank would likely be wiped out.  And 
nationalizing even one or two banks could create a chain reaction of 
failing confidence. . . . 
Nationalization would also be expensive and complicated, taxing a 
bureaucracy that isn’t set up to operate mega-firms.  And while the goal of 
2009 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.5All Rights Reserved

nationalization may be to return companies to private hands, the 
temptation to run them for political purposes would be immense. 
Obviously, there are arguments on both sides. 
One Proposal
 
The other night, I had dinner with my friend Richard Ressler, principal and founder of 
CIM Group.  He has an idea as to how things can be fixed (as usual), and it’s a pretty 
good one.  I’ll summarize below his thoughts on the banking industry: 
There are banking institutions which, because of their magnitude and significance,
should be supported through deposit insurance, government guarantees and rescues.
These banks should engage only in the prosaic acts of accepting deposits and making
loans.  They should not take on ultra-high leverage or make exotic investments.  And
they shouldn’t do business through unregulated, off-balance-sheet subsidiaries.
Institutions that wish to do things that are off-limits to these banks should do so, but
without the benefit of government protection.  If they want to take on 30-times
leverage and pursue proprietary profits, they should bear the consequences
themselves.
Thus banking and risky investing should be separated.
In The New York Times of February 2, Professor Paul Krugman of Princeton argued that 
we have to avoid “lemon socialism: taxpayers bear the cost if things go wrong, but 
stockholders and executives get the benefits if things go right.”  One way to prevent this, 
as Richard suggests, is to make sure government support and high-octane risk taking 
don’t take place in the same firms. 
I’ve been told it isn’t his, but a saying widely attributed to Mark Twain seems to be on 
the mark:  “History doesn’t repeat itself, but it does rhyme.”  There’s no need to invent 
the mechanism through which to accomplish the above; we can look to history and gain 
inspiration from the Glass-Steagall Act.   
After the Great Crash, congressional committees investigated its causes, some of which 
remind one of today’s.  The result was this 1933 law, which mandated that banking be 
separated from investment banking and investment services.  It’s far from irrelevant to 
the current situation that Glass-Steagall’s powers ended in 1999, when key parts were 
repealed by the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act.  This new law had the goal of encouraging 
competition in banking, investment services and insurance, by permitting common 
ownership by financial conglomerates. 
Protecting society against risky investment activities on the part of government-
insured institutions is a good thing.  And competition in providing financial services 
is a good thing.  But the two goals can be in conflict and have to be balanced, and the 
consensus as to which should prevail will oscillate from time to time.  So in addition to 
2009 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.6All Rights Reserved

there not being perfect solutions, there also may not be permanent solutions.  That’s 
why crises will recur and history will continue to rhyme. 
Politics as Usual
 
Few phrases strike terror in the hearts of businesspeople and many just-plain-citizens 
more than the three little words that are the title of this section.  The other day, a friend 
with high-up experience explained the facts of life in Washington.  He organized his 
observations into the “Three P’s.”   
Policy is fashioned through intellectual debate conducted on a high plane.  Well-
meaning people can disagree, but policy analysis follows from facts and underlying
ideology in a relatively straightforward way.
Process is the mechanism through which policy is turned into action.  It is complex
and arcane and the exclusive province of people with experience in Washington.
Politics shapes the law that policy becomes.  My friend had lots of words for it, but
the one that stood out to me was “distasteful.”
As an aside, my friend laid out an important difference between government and 
business, in which he’s also highly experienced.  In business, he says, everyone’s main 
goal is the success of the company.  Contributing to the success of the company enables 
an individual to demonstrate ability and thus rise in the organization.  Success for the 
company creates a pool of profits from which the individual can be well paid.  It also 
amounts to a “win” for a team of which every person wants to be a member. 
But in government, success is hard to measure, difficult to connect to any one 
individual’s contribution, and slow in coming.  Thus it’s hard to view success for the 
government as constituting elected officials’ primary motivation.  Instead, the most 
important thing is getting re-elected.  That personal, short-term consideration can have 
nothing to do with the long-term well-being of the nation.  This is especially true in the 
House of Representatives, he says, where two-year terms mean the members are never 
done running for re-election. 
Despite the crisis facing the country and the crying need for prompt action, we’re seeing 
a good dose of politics as usual.  YouTube provides an up-close look at this stuff.  It also 
gives politicians the audience many seem to crave. 
Today a lynch-mob attitude prevails toward bankers, mortgage lenders and credit-rating 
agencies.  I’m not saying a lot of it isn’t deserved, but it still can be overdone.  It’s always 
good political theater to pile on a purported villain, whether through a perp-walk for 
handcuffed inside traders in 1986 or a televised congressional hearing for bankers in 
2009.   
Check out Congress’s grilling of bankers on YouTube and you’ll see what I think is 
vilification and ad hominem attack (“appealing to one’s prejudices, emotions, or special 
2009 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.7All Rights Reserved

interests rather than to one’s intellect or reason” – Random House Dictionary) intended 
for public consumption.  One congressman told Vikram Pandit, Citibank’s CEO, he was 
amazed by a deal the bank had made: “The government gets $7 billion in preferred stock 
and the government’s on the hook for $250 billion of losses. . . .  You tell me, Mr. Pandit: 
where can I get a deal like this?”  Pandit explained that it was insurance: for a premium 
of $7 billion, Citibank got a policy covering $301 billion of mortgage securities, with Citi 
taking the first $30 billion of losses and 10% of any losses beyond that.   
Should it come as a surprise that an insurance policy costs significantly less to buy than 
the amount of risk assumed by the insurer?  If it didn’t, why would anyone buy one?  
Under this policy, Citi will lose money if there aren’t $38 billion in losses (in which case 
Citi would receive nothing on the first $30 billion but 90% of the next $8 billion, so 
proceeds would be equal to the $7 billion premium it had paid).  Was this deal really such 
a giveaway?  And should the Congressman really be surprised to learn the government 
has a preference for seeing Citi survive and is willing to cut it a good deal? 
On the campaign trail and in victory, President Obama called for non-partisanship and 
united action.  With Democrats controlling the White House and Congress, to him that 
means Republicans should vote in favor of solutions crafted primarily by Democrats.  So 
far, it’s not happening.  On the stimulus package, only three of the 217 Republican votes 
in Congress – just over one percent – were cast with the Democratic majority.  (And only 
seven of the 308 Democratic votes went with the Republicans.)  Not much aisle crossing 
in either direction.  Of course, there are lots of reasons why broad agreement is rarely 
seen: 
Genuine ideological differences exist between individuals and between parties.
Some want an expanded government to fix problems, and others prefer to rely on free
markets to do so.  Some view increased government spending as holding the key to
the solution, and others prefer to reduce taxes.  Some want to rescue weak financial
institutions, and others want only the strongest, best-run to survive.  Thus, failing to
go along with the majority isn’t necessarily a sign of a character flaw.
There are also valid differences in motivation.  The president is a national officer
whose job it is to find an overall solution.  But legislators are elected locally to
represent local interests, and those can diverge from the interests of other regions or
the nation.  It shouldn’t come as a surprise that they push for particular benefits for
their constituents.
Finally there comes self-interest.  The truth is that each party has the underlying goal
of wanting to elect its members and make the other side look bad.  And even if it’s
needed to solve a grave national problem, a conservative answer might be repugnant
and unacceptable to voters in a liberal district, and vice versa.  Thus, doing the “right
thing” can be tantamount to political suicide.  How many elected officials will choose
the latter?
2009 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.8All Rights Reserved

Today’s Rhetoric 
I think people in government who’re addressing the situation have a difficult row to hoe:   
First and most immediately, they’ve had to play up the emergency in order to
convince legislators (and the voters who put them in office) that the situation is dire
and strong action is required.  Thus we’ve heard words like “catastrophe,” “collapse”
and “worst since the Great Depression.”
Second, however, they’re well advised to play down the threat.  Franklin D.
Roosevelt receives a lot of credit for having said, “The only thing we have to fear is
fear itself.”  Given the crucial role of confidence in the functioning of an economy,
it’s not a great idea to spread panic.  The rational response of frightened people is to
save rather than spend, and to sell investments rather than buy, making things worse.
Third, the President likely wants to create modest expectations.  If there’s a feeling
that a valid response should work right away, slow progress will look like failure.  No
one wants consumers and businesses to further pull in their horns if economic
recovery isn’t forthcoming in 2009.
It’s hard not to be sympathetic to this dilemma.  It shows another of the ways in which 
conflicting goals have to be compromised in the real world of economics and politics. 
The Bottom Line
 
There are so many moving parts to the current situation – and to its causes and what we 
hope will be its solution – that I’ve tried to boil things down to the essentials.  In order 
to right the system and get the economy moving forward again, I think three main 
things have to be accomplished: 
Our economy and its component parts have to be delevered;
The vast destruction of capital has to be dealt with; and
Confidence has to be restored.
Here’s how Paul Krugman described the challenge in The New York Times of February 
16: 
For most of the last decade America was a nation of borrowers and 
spenders, not savers. . . .   
Yet until very recently Americans believed they were getting richer, 
because they received statements saying that their houses and stock 
portfolios were appreciating in value faster than their debts were 
increasing. . . . 
2009 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.9All Rights Reserved

Then reality struck, and it turned out that the worriers had been right all 
along.  The surge in asset values had been an illusion – but the surge in 
debt had been all too real. . . . 
. . . this is a broad-based mess.  Everyone talks about the problem
s of the 
banks, which are indeed in even worse shape than the rest of the system.  
But the banks aren’t the only players with too much debt and too few 
assets; the same description applies to the private sector as a whole. 
As the great American economist Irving Fisher pointed out in the 1930s, 
the things people and companies do when they realize they have too much 
debt tend to be self-defeating when everyone tries to do them at the same 
time.  Attempts to sell assets and pay off debt deepen the plunge in asset 
prices, further reducing net worth.  Attempts to save more translate into a 
collapse of consumer demand, deepening the economic slump.   
. . . Government officials understand the issue: we need to “contain what is 
a very damaging and potentially deflationary spiral,” says Lawrence 
Summers, a top Obama economic adviser. 
Debt has to be reduced, and it’s happening (other than at the federal level, of course).  
But the way it happens is usually unpleasant: bankruptcies, foreclosures and debt 
restructurings.  “Debt reduction” sounds like a good thing, but it’s likely to be 
accompanied by the painful loss of the assets that had been bought with borrowed 
money.   
Many assets are worth far less than they used to be – that’s one of the main reasons why 
the debt load has become unbearable and has to be reduced.  Investors, consumers, 
homeowners and financial institutions will have to rebuild their capital as they – 
and the economy – attempt to again move ahead. 
And confidence has to be rebuilt, too.  The willingness to borrow, spend and invest 
will rebound only when people believe incomes and asset values will resume their 
growth.   
In the past, we’ve seen a standard pattern unfold, with the best examples falling in the 
corporate debt arena.  Once denial ends and people accept capital destruction as a 
fact, restructurings can take place in which debt is discharged and ownership 
changes hands.  The transition of assets to new owners, who may have lower cost 
bases and the ability to inject additional capital, brings the possibility of attractive 
returns, the onset of which restores interest in investing.  It seems inescapable that 
this pattern will be a major feature of the next few years. 
The government’s actions clearly are aimed at accomplishing the three things I say we 
need.  Some will work, and some won’t.  I believe that, eventually, the combination of 
things they try – along with the pattern described above and the positive bent that 
2009 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.10All Rights Reserved

underlies the free market system – will return us to an upward trajectory.  It just 
won’t be easy, quick or painless. 
And that’s why I think the investment decisions we make today must emphasize 
value
, survivability and staying power.  I readily acknowledge that assuring survival in 
bad times is inconsistent with return maximization in good times.  Insistence on these 
three things won’t produce the greatest rewards if the economy and markets surprise on 
the upside, but that’s not my main concern. 
Given the uncertainty present today, it’s hard enough to find investments that can be 
relied on to deliver solid returns in good times but also assure survival in bad.  In that 
interest, we’ve always been willing to cede to others much of that part of the return 
distribution lying between “solid” and “maximum.”  This time is no different. 
March 5, 2009 
2009 Oaktree Capital Management, L.P.11All Rights Reserved